<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dedication-to-volume-of-poems-entitled-a-years-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedication to Volume of Poems Entitled a Year’s Life</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The gentle Una I have loved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snowy maiden, pure and mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since ever by her side I roved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through ventures strange, a wondering child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fantasy a Red Cross Knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning for her dear sake to fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If there be one who can, like her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make sunshine in life’s shady places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One in whose holy bosom stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many gentle household graces⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such I think there needs must be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will she accept this book from me?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="opening-poem-to-a-years-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Opening Poem to a Year’s Life</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hope first the youthful Poet leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is glad to follow her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind is she, and to all his needs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a free hand doth minister.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, when sweet Hope at last hath fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cometh her sister, Memory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wreathes Hope’s garlands round her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strives to seem as fair as she.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Hope comes back, and by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She leads a child most fair to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with a joyous face doth stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uniting Hope and Memory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So brighter grew the Earth around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bluer grew the sky above;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Poet now his guide hath found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And follows in the steps of Love.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="threnodia" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Threnodia</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Gone, gone from us! and shall we see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those sibyl-leaves of destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those calm eyes, nevermore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those deep, dark eyes so warm and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein the fortunes of the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay slumbering in prophetic light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In characters a child might scan?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So bright, and gone forth utterly!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh stern word⁠—Nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The stars of those two gentle eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will shine no more on earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quenched are the hopes that had their birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we watched them slowly rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stars of a mother’s fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she would read them o’er and o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pondering, as she sate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over their dear astrology,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which she had conned and conned before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeming she needs must read aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was writ so passing bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, alas! she knew not why.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her voice would falter in its song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears would slide from out her eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent, as they were doing wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh stern word⁠—Nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The tongue that scarce had learned to claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An entrance to a mother’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that dear talisman, a mother’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeps all forgetful of its art!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loved to see the infant soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(How mighty in the weakness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of its untutored meekness!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peep timidly from out its nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lips, the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fluttering with half-fledged words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hushing to a smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That more than words expressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his glad mother on him stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snatched him to her breast!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, thoughts were brooding in those eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would have soared like strong-winged birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far, far into the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladding the earth with song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gushing harmonies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he but tarried with us long!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh stern word⁠—Nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How peacefully they rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossfolded there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his little breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those small, white hands that ne’er were still before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever sported with his mother’s hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the plain cross that on her breast she wore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her heart no more will beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the touch of that soft palm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ever seemed a new surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sending glad thoughts up to her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bless him with their holy calm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet thoughts! they made her eyes as sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How quiet are the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wove those pleasant bands!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that they do not rise and sink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his calm breathing, I should think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he were dropped asleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! too deep, too deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this his slumber!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time scarce can number</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years ere he shall wake again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, may we see his eyelids open then!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh stern word⁠—Nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">As the airy gossamere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating in the sunlight clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er it toucheth clingeth tightly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound glossy leal or stump unsightly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from his spirit wandered out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tendrils spreading all about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knitting all things to its thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a perfect love of all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh stern word⁠—Nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He did but float a little way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the stream of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dreamy eyes watching the ripples play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hearkening their fairy chime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slender sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er felt the gale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did but float a little way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, putting to the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet ‘t was early day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went calmly on his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dwell with us no more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No jarring did he feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No grating on his shallop’s keel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strip of silver sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled the waters with the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he was seen no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh stern word⁠—Nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Full short his journey was; no dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earth unto his sandals clave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weary weight that old men must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bore not to the grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seemed a cherub who had lost his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wandered hither, so his stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With us was short, and ‘t was most meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he should be no delver in earth’s clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor need to pause and cleanse his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand before his God:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh blest word⁠—Evermore!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-serenade" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Serenade</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Gentle, Lady, be thy sleeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peaceful may thy dreamings be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While around thy soul is sweeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreamy-winged, our melody;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chant we, Brothers, sad and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let our song be soft and low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the voice of other years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let our hearts within us melt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gentleness, as if we felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dropping of our mother’s tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Lady! now our song is bringing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back again thy childhood’s hours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearest thou the humbee singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowsily among the flowers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleepily, sleepily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the noontide swayeth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half rested on the slender stalks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That edge those well-known garden walks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearest thou the fitful whirring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the humbird’s viewless wings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel’st not round thy heart the stirring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of childhood’s half-forgotten things?</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Seest thou the dear old dwelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the woodbine round the door?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brothers, soft! her breast is swelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the busy thoughts of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowly sing ye, sing ye mildly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>House her spirit not so wildly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest she sleep not any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the pleasant summertide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open stands the window wide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose voices, Lady, art thou drinking?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sings the best belovèd tune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a clear note, rising, sinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a thrush’s song in June?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose laugh is that which rings so clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joyous in thine eager ear?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Lower, Brothers, yet more low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weave the song in mazy twines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She heareth now the west wind blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At evening through the clump of pines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O! mournful is their tune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of a crazèd thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, to herself alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ever murmuring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the night and through the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For something that hath passed away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often, Lady, hast thou listened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often have thy blue eyes glistened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the summer evening breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moaned sadly through those lonely trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with the fierce wind from the north</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrung their mournful music forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever the river floweth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an unbroken stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever the west wind bloweth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmuring as he goeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingling with her dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward still the river sweepeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a sound of long-agone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowly, Brothers, lo! she weepeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is now no more alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long-loved forms and long-loved faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round about her pillow throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through her memory’s desert places</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow the waters of our song.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lady! if thy life be holy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when thou wert yet a child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though our song be melancholy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will stir no anguish wild;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the soul that hath lived well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the soul that child-like is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is quiet in the spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brings back early memories.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-lift-up-the-curtains-of-thine-eyes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Lift Up the Curtains of Thine Eyes</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lift up the curtains of thine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let their light outshine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me adore the mysteries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those mild orbs of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ever queenly calm do roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attunèd to an ordered soul!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Open thy lips yet once again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, while my soul doth hush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With awe, pour forth that holy strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seemeth me to gush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fount of music, running o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy deep spirit’s inmost core!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The melody that dwells in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begets in me as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spiritual harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mild and blessèd spell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far, far above earth’s atmosphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rise, whene’er thy voice I hear.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-departed" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Departed</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Not they alone are the departed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have laid them down to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the grave narrow and lonely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for them only do I vigils keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for them only am I heavy-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for them only!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Many, many, there are many</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who no more are with me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As cherished, as beloved as any</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I have seen upon the bier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I weep to think of those old faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see them in their grief or mirth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I weep⁠—for there are empty places</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around my heart’s once crowded hearth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold ground doth not cover them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass hath not grown over them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet are they gone from me on earth;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O! how more bitter is this weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than for those lost ones who are sleeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sun will shine and flowers blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where gentle winds will whisper low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the stars have them in their keeping!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore from me who loved you so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O! wherefore did ye go?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have shed full many a tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have wrestled oft in prayer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye do not come again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How could anything so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How could anything so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanish like the summer rain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, no, it cannot be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye are still with me!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And yet, O! where art thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Childhood, with sunny brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And floating hair?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where art thou hiding now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have sought thee everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All among the shrubs and flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those garden-walks of ours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art not there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the shadow of Night’s wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath darkened all the Earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I listen for thy gambolings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the cheerful hearth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art not there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I listen to the far-off bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I murmur o’er the little songs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou didst love so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasant memories come in throngs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine eyes are blurred with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no glimpse of thee appears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lonely am I in the Winter, lonely in the Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summer and Harvest bring no trace of thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! whither, whither art thou wandering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who didst once so cleave to me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And Love is gone;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have seen him come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have seen him, too, depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving desolate his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bright home in my heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am alone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold, cold is his hearth-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide open stands the door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frolic and the gentle one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I see no more, no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the fount the bowl is broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall drink it not again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my longing prayers are spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt, ah, woe is me, in vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, childish hopes and childish fancies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither have ye fled away?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I long for you in mournful trances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I long for you by night and day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful thoughts that once were mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might I but win you back once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might ye about my being twine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cluster as ye did of yore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O! do not let me pray in vain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How good and happy I should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How free from every shade of pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye would come again to me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, come again! come, come again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath the sun forgot its brightness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have the stars forgot to shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they bring not their wonted lightness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this weary heart of mine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not the sun that shone on thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy childhood, long ago⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the same stars silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking on the same bright snow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the same that Love and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together watched in days gone by!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, not the same, alas for me!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Would God that those who early went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the house dark and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom our mourning heads were bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom our steps were slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, would that these alone had left us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Fate of these alone had reft us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would God indeed that it were so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many leaves too soon must wither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many flowers too soon must die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many bright ones wandering hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know not whence, we know not why,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the leaves and like the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanish, ere the summer hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brought them to us, have gone by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O for the hopes and for the feelings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Childhood, that I shared with thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high resolves, the bright revealings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the soul’s might, which thou gav’st me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentle Love, woe worth the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe worth the hour when thou wert born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe worth the day thou fled’st away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shade across the wind-waved corn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dewdrop falling from the leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chance-shaken in a summer’s morn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe, woe is me! my sick heart grieves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Companionless and anguish-worn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know it well, our manly years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be baptized in bitter tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many fountains must run dry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That youth has dreamed for long hours by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choked by convention’s siroc blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or drifting sands of many cares;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly they leave us all at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cease their flowing unawares.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-bobolink" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Bobolink</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Anacreon of the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drunk with the joy of spring!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the tall pine’s voiceful shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lie and drink thy jargoning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul is full with melodies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One drop would overflow it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send the tears into mine eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what car’st thou to know it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heart is free as mountain air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of thy lays thou hast no care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattering them gayly everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy, unconscious poet!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Upon a tuft of meadow grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thy loved-one tends the nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou swayest as the breezes pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unburthening thine o’erfull breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the crowded songs that fill it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as joy may choose to will it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord of thy love and liberty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blithest bird of merry May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou turnest thy bright eyes on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That say as plain as eye can say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here sit we, here in the summer weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I and my modest mate together;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever your wise thoughts may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under that gloomy old pine tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We do not value them a feather.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Now, leaving earth and me behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou beatest up against the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, floating slowly down before it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above thy grass-hid nest thou flutterest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy bridal love-song utterest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raining showers of music o’er it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary never, still thou trillest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring-gladsome lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of moss-rimmed water-brooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmuring through pebbly nooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In quiet summer days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart with happiness thou fillest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seem again to be a boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching thee, gay, blithesome lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the bending grass-tops hover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivering thy wings for joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s something in the apple-blossom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greening grass and bobolink’s song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wakes again within my bosom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feelings which have slumbered long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long, long years ago I wandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seem to wander even yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hours the idle school-boy squandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man would die ere he’d forget.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hours that frosty eld deemed wasted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nodding his gray head toward my books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dearer prize the lore I tasted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With you, among the trees and brooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all that I have gained since then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From learnèd books or study-withered men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature, thy soul was one with mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as a sister by a younger brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is loved, each flowing to the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such love for me was thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wert thou not more like a loving mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sympathy and loving power to heal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against whose heart my throbbing heart I’d lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moan my childish sorrows all away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till calm and holiness would o’er me steal?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not the golden sunset a dear friend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found I no kindness in the silent moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the green trees, whose tops did sway and bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low singing evermore their pleasant tune?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt I no heart in dim and solemn woods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No loved-one’s voice in lonely solitudes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, yes! unhoodwinked then my spirit’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind leaders had not <i>taught me</i> to be wise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Dear hours! which now again I over-live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing and seeing with the ears and eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of childhood, ye were bees, that to the hive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my young heart came laden with rich prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered in fields and woods and sunny dells, to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirit’s food in days more wintery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, yet again ye come! ye come!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a child once more at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long sojourning in alien climes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lie upon my mother’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling the blessedness of rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dwelling in the light of other times.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O ye whose living is not <i>Life</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose dying is but death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Song, empty toil and petty strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rounded with loss of breath!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, look on Nature’s countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink in the blessing of her glance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look on the sunset, hear the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cataract, the awful thunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, worship by the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, and then only, shall ye find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ever-growing wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man is not all in all to ye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go with a meek and humble soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall the scales of self unroll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off your eyes⁠—the weary packs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop from your heavy-laden backs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ye shall see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With reverent and hopeful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowing with new-born energies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How great a thing it is to <b>be</b>!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-what-reck-i-of-the-stars-when-i" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">What Reck I of the Stars, When I</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What reck I of the stars, when I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May gaze into thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which the brown hair flowingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is parted maidenwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy pale forehead, calm and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over thy cheeks so rosy white?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What care I for the red moon-rise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far liefer would I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch the joy within thine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gush up at sight of it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself my queenly moon shall be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruling my heart’s deep tides for me!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What heed I if the sky be blue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So are thy holy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bright with shadows ever new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of changeful sympathies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in thy soul’s unruffled deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rest evermore, but never sleep.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-poet-he-who-hath-felt-lifes-mystery" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Poet</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">He Who Hath Felt Life’s Mystery</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>He who hath felt Life’s mystery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Press on him like thick night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose soul hath known no history</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But struggling after light;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who hath seen dim shapes arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the soundless depths of soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which gaze on him with meaning eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full of the mighty whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will no word of healing speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although he pray night-long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O, help me, save me! I am weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ye are wondrous strong!”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, in the midnight dark and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath felt a voice of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come echoing through the halls of sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the lone heart of Night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, starting from his restless bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath watched and wept to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What meant that oracle of dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That stirred his being so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who hath felt how strong and great</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This Godlike soul of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked full in the eyes of Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Life and Thought began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor of whose moveless trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knoweth no spot of weakness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hath trod fear into the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the feet of meekness;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who hath calmly borne his cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing himself the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of time, nor counted it a loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To learn by suffering;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who hath worshipped woman still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a pure soul and lowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever hath in deed or will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Profaned her temple holy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is the Poet, him unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gift of song is given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose life is lofty, strong, and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who never fell from Heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is the Poet, from his lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To live forevermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Majestical as full-sailed ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The words of Wisdom pour.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="flowers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Flowers</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>
						<span>“Hail be thou, holie hearbe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Growing on the ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All in the mount Calvary</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">First wert thou found;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art good for manie a sore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thou healest manie a wound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the name of sweete Jesus</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I take thee from the ground.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>—⁠<i>Ancient Charm-verse</i>.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When, from a pleasant ramble, home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh-stored with quiet thoughts, I come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pluck some wayside flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And press it in the choicest nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a much-loved and oft-read book;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when upon its leaves I look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a less happy hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear memory bears me far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto her fairy bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her breast my head I lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, in a motherly, sweet strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sings me gently back again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To by-gone feelings, until they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem children born of yesterday.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yes, many a story of past hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I read in these dear withered flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once again I seem to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lying beneath the old oak tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking up into the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through thick leaves rifted fitfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lulled by the rustling of the vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the faint low of far-off kine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once again I seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch the whirling bubbles flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through shade and gleam alternately,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down the vine-bowered stream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ’neath the odorous linden trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When summer twilight lingers long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the flowing of the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unseen insects’ slumberous song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mingle into one and seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like dim murmurs of a dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair faces, too, I seem to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling from pleasant eyes at me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And voices sweet I hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, like remembered melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flow through my spirit’s ear.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A poem every flower is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every leaf a line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with delicious memories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fill this heart of mine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No living blossoms are so clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As these dead relics treasured here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One tells of Love, of friendship one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s quiet after-sunset time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the all-dazzling light is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with the soul’s low vesper-chime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er half its heaven doth out-flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A holy calm and steady glow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some are gay feast-songs, some are dirges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some a joy with sorrow merges;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sings the shadowed woods, and one the roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ocean’s everlasting surges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tumbling upon the beach’s hard-beat floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sliding backward from the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet the landward waves and slowly plunge once more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O flowers of grace, I bless ye all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the dear faces ye recall!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Upon the banks of Life’s deep streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a flower groweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with a wondrous fragrance teems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the silent water gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembles as the water floweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a one the wave upteareth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Washing ever the roots away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far upon its bosom beareth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bloom no more in Youth’s glad May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As farther on the river runs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flowing more deep and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only a few pale, scattered ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are seen the dreary banks along;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where those flowers do not grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The river floweth dark and chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its voice is sad, and with its flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingles ever a sense of ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, Poet, thou who gather dost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Life’s best flowers the brightest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, take good heed they be not lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While with the angry flood thou fightest!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">In the cool grottos of the soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence flows thought’s crystal river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence songs of joy forever roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Him who is the Giver⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There store thou them, where fresh and green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their leaves and blossoms may be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spring of joy that faileth never;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There store thou them, and they shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blessing and a peace to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their youth and purity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt be young forever!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, with their fragrance rich and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy living shall be rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strength shall be thine thy cross to bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall be a chaplet fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathing a pure and holy air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To crown thy holy life.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O Poet! above all men blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take heed that thus thou store them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, Hope, and Faith shall ever rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet birds (upon how sweet a nest!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watchfully brooding o’er them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from those flowers of Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scatter thou many a blessèd seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefrom an offspring may arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cheer the hearts and light the eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of after-voyagers in their need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shall not fall on stony ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, yielding all their hundred-fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall shed a peacefulness around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose strengthening joy may not be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall thy name be blest of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy remembrance never die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of that seed shall surely fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fair garden of Eternity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exult then in the nobleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this thy work so holy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet be not thou one jot the less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humble and meek and lowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let thine exultation be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reverence of a bended knee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thy life a poem write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Built strongly day by day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the rock of Truth and Right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its deep foundations lay.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It is thy <b>duty</b>! Guard it well!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For unto thee hath much been given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou canst make this life a Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Jacob’s-ladder up to Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not thy baptism in Life’s wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make thee like him whom Homer sings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sleeper in a living grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Callous and hard to outward things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But open all thy soul and sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every blessèd influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the heart of Nature springs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall thy Life-flowers be to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thy best years are told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As much as these have been to me⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, more, a thousand-fold!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lover" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lover</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Go from the world from East to West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search every land beneath the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You cannot find a man so blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A king so powerful as I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though you should seek eternally.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For I a gentle lover be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting at my loved-one’s side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She giveth her whole soul to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a wish or thought of pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she shall be my cherished bride.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">No show of gaudiness hath she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She doth not flash with jewels rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In beautiful simplicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She weareth leafy garlands fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or modest flowers in her hair.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes she dons a robe of green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes a robe of snowy white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, in whatever garb she’s seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seems most beautiful and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is the loveliest to my sight.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Not I her lover am alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet unto all she doth suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None jealous is, and every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reads love and truth within her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deemeth her his own dear prize.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And so thou art, Eternal Nature!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, bride of Heaven, so thou art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, wholly lovest every creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving to each no stinted part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But filling every peaceful heart.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="to-e-w-g" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To E. W. G.</h2>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>
					<span>“Dear Child! dear happy Girl! if thou appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heedless⁠—untouched with awe or serious thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy nature is not therefore less divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou liest in Abraham’s bosom all the year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And worship’st at the Temple’s inner shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God being with thee when we know it not.”</span>
				</p>
				<cite>—⁠<i>Wordsworth.</i></cite>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>As through a strip of sunny light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white dove flashes swiftly on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So suddenly before my sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou gleamed’st a moment and wert gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet I long shall bear in mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasant thoughts thou left’st behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou mad’st me happy with thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And happy with thine open smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as I write, sweet memories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thronging round me all the while;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mad’st me happy with thine eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gentle feelings long forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked up and oped their eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like violets when they see a spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of summer in the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Around thy playful lips did glitter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heat-lightnings of a girlish scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harmless they were, for nothing bitter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy dear heart was ever born⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That merry heart that could not lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within its warm nest quietly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever from each full, dark eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was looking kindly night and morn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There was an archness in thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of the gentlest mockeries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy light laughter rang as clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As water-drops I loved to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In days of boyhood, as they fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tinkling far down the dim, still well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with its sound come back once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feelings of my early years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half aloud I murmured o’er⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sure I have heard that sound before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is so pleasant in mine ears.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Whenever thou didst look on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought of merry birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something of spring’s melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to me in thy words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy thoughts did dance and bound along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like happy children in their play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose hearts run over into song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gladness of the summer’s day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine grew dizzy with the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still feeling lighter and more light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, joining hands, they whirled away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As blithe and merrily as they.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I bound a larch-twig round with flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou didst twine among thy hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gladsome were the few, short hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I was with thee there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now that thou art far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe-nestled in thy warmer clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In memory of a happier day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I twine this simple wreath of rhyme.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Dost mind how she, whom thou dost love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than in light words may be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coronal of amaranth wove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About thy duly-sobered head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which kept itself a moment still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she might have her gentle will?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy childlike grace and purity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O keep forevermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as thou art, still strive to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on the farther shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Time’s dark waters ye may meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she may twine around thy brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wreath of those bright flowers that grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where blessèd angels set their feet!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="isabel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Isabel</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As the leaf upon the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fluttering, gleaming constantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a lightsome thing was she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My gay and gentle Isabel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her heart was fed with love-springs sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in her face you’d see it beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the sound of welcome feet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And were not mine so, Isabel?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">She knew it not, but she was fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a moonbeam was her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That falls where flowing ripples are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In summer evenings, Isabel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her heart and tongue were scarce apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwittingly her lips would part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love came gushing from her heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman’s heart of Isabel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So pure her flesh-garb, and like dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in her features glimmered through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each working of her spirit true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wondrous beauty, Isabel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sunbeam struggling through thick leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A reaper’s song mid yellow sheaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less gladsome were;⁠—my spirit grieves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think of thee, mild Isabel!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I know not when I loved thee first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not loving, I had been accurst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, having loved, my heart will burst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longing for thee, dear Isabel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silent tears my cheeks are wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would be calm, I would forget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thy blue eyes gaze on me yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When stars have risen, Isabel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The winds mourn for thee, Isabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowers expect thee in the dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy gentle spirit loved them well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I for thy sake, Isabel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunsets seem less lovely now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than when, leaf checkered, on thy brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fell as lovingly as thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingered’st till moon-rise, Isabel!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">At dead of night I seem to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fair, pale features constantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upturned in silent prayer for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er moveless clasped hands, Isabel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I call thee, thou dost not reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars gleam coldly on thine eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As like a dream thou flittest by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leav’st me weeping, Isabel!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="music" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Music</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I seem to lie with drooping eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreaming sweet dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half longings and half memories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In woods where streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With trembling shades and whirling gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In song and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are ever, ever flowing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the wind, if we list to the rustling grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which numbers his footsteps as they pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seems scarcely to be blowing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the far-heard voice of Spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From sunny slopes comes wandering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calling the violets from the sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bound them under snow-drifts deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To open their childlike, asking eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the new summer’s paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mingled with the gurgling waters⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the dreamy witchery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Acheloüs’ silver-voiced daughters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose and fell with the heaving sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose great heart swelled with ecstasy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The song of many a floating bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Winding through the rifted trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is dreamily half-heard⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sister stream of melodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rippled by the flutterings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rapture-quivered wings.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now beside a cataract</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lie, and through my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From over me and under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The never-ceasing thunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arousingly doth roll;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the darkness all compact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the trackless sea of gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad and deep I hear it boom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At intervals the cloud is cracked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a livid flash doth hiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downward from its floating home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lighting up the precipice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the never-resting foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a dim and ghastly glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, for a heart-beat, in the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shows the sweeping shrouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the midnight clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their wildly-scattered hair.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now listening to a woman’s tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a wood I sit alone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone because our souls are one;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All around my heart it flows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lulling me in deep repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear to speak, I fear to move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest I should break the spell I love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low and gentle, calm and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my inmost soul it goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if my brother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is no longer here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had bended from the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And murmured in my ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strain of that high harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they may sing alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who worship round the throne.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now in a fairy boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the bright waves of song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full merrily I float,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Merrily float along;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My helm is veered, I care not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My white sail bellies over me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bright as gold the ripples be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That plash beneath the bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before, behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They feel the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they are dancing joyously⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, faintly heard, along the far-off shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The surf goes plunging with a lingering roar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or anchored in a shadowy cove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Entranced with harmonies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Slowly I sink and rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the slow waves of music move.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now softly dashing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bubbling, plashing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mazy, dreamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint and streamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ripples into ripples melt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so strongly heard as felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now rapid and quick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the heart beats thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The music silver wavelets crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinct and clear, but never loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now all solemnly and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mild, deep tones they warble low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the glad song of angels, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sang good will and peace to men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now faintly heard and far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the spirit’s ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had caught the anthem of a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chanting with his brother-spheres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the midnight dark and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the body is asleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondrous shadows pour in streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the twofold gate of dreams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now onward roll the billows, swelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a tempest-sound of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of voices doom foretelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the silent ear of Night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now a mingled ecstasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all sweet sounds it is;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! who may tell the agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rapture such as this?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have drunk of the drink of immortals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have drunk of the life-giving wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I may pass the bright portals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That open into a realm divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have drunk it through mine ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the ecstasy of song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When mine eyes would fill with tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That its life were not more long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have drunk it through mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In beauty’s every shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now around my soul it lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No juice of earthly grape!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wings! wings are given to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I can flutter, I can rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a new life gushing through me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweep the heavenly harmonies!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="song-o-i-must-look-on-that-sweet-face-once-more-before-i-die" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">O! I Must Look on That Sweet Face Once More Before I Die</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O! I must look on that sweet face once more before I die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God grant that it may lighten up with joy when I draw nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God grant that she may look on me as kindly as she seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the long night, the restless night, i’ the sunny land of dreams!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I hoped, I thought, she loved me once, and yet, I know not why,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a coldness in her speech, and a coldness in her eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something that in another’s look would not seem cold to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet like ice I feel it chill the heart of memory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She does not come to greet me so frankly as she did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in her utmost openness I feel there’s something hid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She almost seems to shun me, as if she thought that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might win her gentle heart again to feelings long gone by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I sought the first spring-buds for her, the fairest and the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she wore them for their loveliness upon her spotless breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood-root and the violet, the frail anemone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wore them, and alas! I deemed it was for love of me!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As flowers in a darksome place stretch forward to the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to the memory of her I turn by day and night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As flowers in a darksome place grow thin and pale and wan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is it with my darkened heart, now that her light is gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The thousand little things that love doth treasure up for aye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brood upon with moistened eyes when she that’s loved’s away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word, the look, the smile, the blush, the ribbon that she wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each day they grow more dear to me, and pain me more and more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My face I cover with my hands, and bitterly I weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the quick-gathering sands of life should choke a love so deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that the stream, so pure and bright, must turn it from its track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to the heart-springs, whence it rose, roll its full waters back!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As calm as doth the lily float close by the lakelet’s brim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So calm and spotless, down time’s stream, her peaceful days did swim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I had longed, and dreamed, and prayed, that closely by her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to a haven still and sure, my happy life might glide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now, alas! those golden days of youth and hope are o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I must dream those dreams of joy, those guiltless dreams no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet there is something in my heart that whispers ceaselessly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Would God that I might see that face once more before I die!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ianthe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ianthe</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">There is a light within her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like gleams of wandering fire-flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From light to shade it leaps and moves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whenever in her soul arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The holy shapes of things she loves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fitful it shines and changes ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like star-lit ripples on a river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or summer sunshine on the eaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of silver-trembling poplar leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where the lingering dew-drops quiver.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I may not tell the blessedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her mild eyes send to mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The sunset-tinted haziness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of their mysterious shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The dim and holy mournfulness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of their mellow light divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The shadow of the lashes lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Over them so lovingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That they seem to melt away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In a doubtful twilight-gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While I watch the stars arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the evening of her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I love it, yet I almost dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To think what it foreshadoweth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, when I muse how I have read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That such strange light betokened death<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Instead of fire-fly gleams, I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wild corpse-lights gliding waveringly.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">With wayward thoughts her eyes are bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like shiftings of the northern-light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hither, thither, swiftly glance they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In a mazy twining dance they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like ripply lights the sunshine weaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thrown backward from a shaken nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Below some tumbling water-brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On the o’erarching platan-leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All through her glowing face they flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And rest in their deep dwelling-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Those fathomless blue eyes of hers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till, from her burning soul re-lit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While her upheaving bosom stirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They stream again across her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And with such hope and glory fill it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Death could not have the heart to chill it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet when their wild light fades again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I feel a sudden sense of pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As if, while yet her eyes were gleaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And like a shower of sun-lit rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bright fancies from her face were streaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her trembling soul might flit away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As swift and suddenly as they.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">A wild, inspirèd earnestness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Her inmost being fills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And eager self-forgetfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">That speaks not what it wills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But what unto her soul is given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A living oracle from Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which scarcely in her breast is born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When on her trembling lips it thrills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, like a burst of golden skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Through storm-clouds on a sudden torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like a glory of the morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beams marvellously from her eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And then, like a Spring-swollen river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roll the deep waves of her full-hearted thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Crested with sun-lit spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her wild lips curve and quiver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my rapt soul, on the strong tide upcaught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Unwittingly is borne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lulled by a dreamful music ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Far⁠—through the solemn twilight-gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of hoary woods⁠—through valleys green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the trailing vine embowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the purple-clustered grapes are seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep-glowing through rich clumps of waving flowers<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now over foaming rapids swept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And with maddening rapture shook<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now gliding where the water-plants have slept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For ages in a moss-rimmed nook<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Enwoven by a wild-eyed band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Of earth-forgetting dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I float to a delicious land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By a sunset heaven spanned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And musical with streams;<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Around, the calm, majestic forms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And god-like eyes of early Greece I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or listen, till my spirit warms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">To songs of courtly chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or weep, unmindful if my tears be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the meek, suffering love of poor Undine.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Her thoughts are never memories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But ever changeful, ever new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fresh and beautiful as dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That in a dell at noontide lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or, at the close of summer day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The pleasant breath of new-mown hay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Swiftly they come and pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As golden birds across the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As light-gleams on tall meadow-grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which the wind just breathes upon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And when she speaks, her eyes I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down-gushing through their silken lattices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like stars that quiver tremblingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Through leafy branches of the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And her pale cheeks do flush and glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With speaking flashes bright and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As crimson North-lights on new-fallen snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From out the veiling of her hair<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her careless hair that scatters down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On either side her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A waterfall leaf-tinged with brown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And lit with the sunrise.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">When first I saw her, not of earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But heavenly both in grief and mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I thought her; she did seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As fair and full of mystery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As bodiless, as forms we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the rememberings of a dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A moon-lit mist, a strange, dim light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Circled her spirit from my sight;<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Each day more beautiful she grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">More earthly every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet that mysterious, moony hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Faded not all away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She has a sister’s sympathy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With all the wanderers of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But most I’ve seen her bosom stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">When moonlight round her fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For the mild moon it loveth her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">She loveth it as well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And of their love perchance this grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Was born into her wondrous face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I cannot tell how it may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For both, methinks, can scarce be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Still, as she earthly grew to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She grew more heavenly too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">She seems one born in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With earthly feelings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For, while unto her soul are given</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">More pure revealings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Of holiest love and truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet is the mildness of her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Made up of quickest sympathies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Of kindliness and ruth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So, though some shade of awe doth stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our souls for one so far above us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We feel secure that she will love us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And cannot keep from loving her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She is a poem, which to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In speech and look is written bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And to her life’s rich harmony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Doth ever sing itself aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dear, glorious creature!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With eyes so dewy bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And tenderest feeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Itself revealing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In every look and feature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Welcome as a homestead light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one long-wandering in a clouded night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O, lovelier for her woman’s weakness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Which yet is strongly mailed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In armor of courageous meekness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And faith that never failed!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Early and late, at her soul’s gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sits Chastity in warderwise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No thoughts unchallenged, small or great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Go thence into her eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor may a low, unworthy thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beyond that virgin warder win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor one, whose password is not “ought,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">May go without or enter in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I call her, seeing those pure eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Eve of a new Paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which she by gentle word and deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And look no less, doth still create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">About her, for her great thoughts breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A calm that lifts us from our fallen state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes us while with her both good and great<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor is their memory wanting in our need:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With stronger loving, every hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Turneth my heart to this frail flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which, thoughtless of the world, hath grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To beauty and meek gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here in a fair world of its own<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By woman’s instinct trained alone<span>—</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A lily fair which God did bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And which from Nature’s heart did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, wisdom, peace, and Heaven’s perfect law.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="loves-altar" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love’s Altar</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I built an altar in my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I builded it to one alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever silently I stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In happy days of long-agone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make rich offerings to that <b>one</b>.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’Twas garlanded with purest thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crowned with fancy’s flowers bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With choicest gems ’twas all inwrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of truth and feeling; in my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed a spot of cloudless light.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yet when I made my offering there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Cain’s, the incense would not rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back on my heart down-sank the prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And altar-stone and sacrifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew hateful in my tear-dimmed eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O’er-grown with age’s mosses green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little altar firmly stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not, as it once hath been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A selfish shrine;⁠—these time-taught hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring incense now from many lands.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Knowledge doth only widen love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stream, that lone and narrow rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth, deepening ever, onward move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with an even current flows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calmer and calmer to the close.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The love, that in those early days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girt round my spirit like a wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath faded like a morning haze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flames, unpent by self’s mean thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise clearly to the perfect <b>all</b>.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="my-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">My Love</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Not as all other women are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is she that to my soul is dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her glorious fancies come from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the silver evening-star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet her heart is ever near.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Great feelings hath she of her own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which lesser souls may never know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God giveth them to her alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweet they are as any tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith the wind may choose to blow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet in herself she dwelleth not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although no home were half so fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No simplest duty is forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life hath no dim and lowly spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That doth not in her sunshine share.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She doeth little kindnesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which most leave undone, or despise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For naught that sets one heart at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And giveth happiness or peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is low-esteemèd in her eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She hath no scorn of common things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though she seem of other birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round us her heart intwines and clings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And patiently she folds her wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tread the humble paths of earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blessing she is: God made her so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deeds of week-day holiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall from her noiseless as the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hath she ever chanced to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That aught were easier than to bless.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She is most fair, and thereunto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her life doth rightly harmonize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling or thought that was not true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er made less beautiful the blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unclouded heaven of her eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She is a woman: one in whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spring-time of her childish years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath never lost its fresh perfume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though knowing well that life hath room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many blights and many tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I love her with a love as still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a broad river’s peaceful might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, by high tower and lowly mill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems following its own wayward will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet doth ever flow aright.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, on its full, deep breast serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like quiet isles my duties lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It flows around them and between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes them fresh and fair and green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet homes wherein to live and die.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="with-a-pressed-flower" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">With a Pressed Flower</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This little blossom from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath come from other lands to thine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, once, its white and drooping star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could see its shadow in the Rhine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Perchance some fair-haired German maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath plucked one from the selfsame stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And numbered over, half afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its petals in her evening walk.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘He loves me, loves me not,’ she cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘He loves me more than earth or heaven!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then glad tears have filled her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find the number was uneven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou must count its petals well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it is a gift from me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the last one of all shall tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something I’ve often told to thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But here at home, where we were born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt find blossoms just as true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down-bending every summer morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With freshness of New England dew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For Nature, ever kind to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath granted them the same sweet tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether with German skies above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or here our granite rocks among.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="impartiality" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Impartiality</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot say a scene is fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it is beloved of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall love to linger there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sake of thy dear memory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not be so coldly just</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to love only what I must.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I cannot say a thought is good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because thou foundest joy in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each soul must choose its proper food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Nature hath decreed most fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall ever deem it so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it made thy heart o’erflow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I love thee for that thou art fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that thy spirit joys in aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Createth a new beauty there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thine own dearest image fraught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love, for others’ sake that springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gives half their charm to lovely things.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="bellerophon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Bellerophon</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Dedicated to My Friend, John F. Heath</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I feel the bandages unroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bound my inward seeing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freed are the bright wings of my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Types of my god-like being;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High thoughts are swelling in my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rushing through my brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I never more lose part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In my soul’s realm again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things fair, where’er they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In earth or air, in sky or sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have loved them all, and taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All within my throbbing breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more my spirit can be shaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From its calm and kingly rest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love hath shed its light around me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love hath pierced the shades that bound me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes are opened, I can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The universe’s mystery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mighty heart and core</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of After and Before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see, and I am weak no more!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Upward! upward evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Heaven’s open gate I soar!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little thoughts are far behind me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, when custom weaves together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the nobler man can tether⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cobwebs now no more can bind me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now fold thy wings a little while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My trancèd soul, and lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At rest on this Calypso-isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That floats in mellow sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand isles with gentle motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rock upon the sunset ocean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand isles of thousand hues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How bright! how beautiful! how rare!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my spirit they infuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A purer, a diviner air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth is growing dimmer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the last faint glimmer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath faded from the hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in my higher atmosphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun-light streameth red and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fringing the islets still;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love lifts us to the sun-light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the whole world would be dark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, wide Love, is the one light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All else is but a fading spark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love is the nectar which doth fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our soul’s cup even to overflowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, warming heart, and thought, and will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth lie within us mildly glowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From its own centre raying out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty and Truth on all without.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Each on his golden throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full royally, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the stars above me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sceptre and with diadem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mildly they look down and love me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have ever yet loved them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see their ever-sleepless eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching the growth of destinies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Calm, sedate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The eyes of Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wink not, nor do roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But search the depths of soul⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in those mighty depths they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The germs of all Futurity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting but the fitting time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To burst and ripen into prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the womb of mother Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seeds of plants and forests lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Age upon age and never die⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in the souls of all men wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undyingly the seeds of Fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chance breaks the clod and forth they spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filling blind men with wondering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal stars! with holy awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if a present God I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look into those mighty eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see great destinies arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in those of mortal men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feelings glow and fade again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things below, all things above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are open to the eyes of Love.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Of Knowledge Love is master-key,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowledge of Beauty; passing dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is each to each, and mutually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one doth make the other clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty is Love, and what we love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straightway is beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is the circle round and full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so dear Love doth live and move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have his being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finding his proper food</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sure inseeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all things pure and good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he at will doth cull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a joyous butterfly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hiving in the sunny bowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the soul’s fairest flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, between the earth and sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering at liberty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For happy, happy hours!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The thoughts of Love are Poesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this fair earth and all we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are the thoughts of Deity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Love is ours by our birthright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath cleared mine inward sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glorious shapes with glorious eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round about my spirit glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shedding a mild and golden light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the shadowy face of Night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unearthly melodies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hand in hand, they weave their dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While a deep, ambrosial lustre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their rounded limbs doth shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through many a rich and golden cluster</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of streaming hair divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In our gross and earthly hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We cannot see the Love-given powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ever round the soul await</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do its sovereign will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, in its moments calm and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It re-assumes its royal state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor longer sits with eyes downcast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A beggar, dreaming of the past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At its own palace-gate.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I too am a Maker and a Poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through my whole soul I feel it and know it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My veins are fired with ecstasy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All-mother Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ne’er give birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one who shall be matched with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lustre of my coronal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall cast a dimness over all.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! alas! what have I spoken?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strong, my eagle wings are broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And back again to earth I fall!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="something-natural" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Something Natural</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When first I saw thy soul-deep eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart yearned to thee instantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange longing in my soul did rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot tell the reason why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must love thee till I die.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The sight of thee hath well-nigh grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As needful to me as the light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am unrestful when alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my heart doth not beat aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except it dwell within thy sight.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And yet⁠—and yet⁠—O selfish love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not happy even with thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see thee in thy brightness move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot well contented be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save thou should’st shine alone for me.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">We should love beauty even as flowers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all, ’tis said, they bud and blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are the world’s as well as ours⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou⁠—alas! God made thee grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fair, I cannot love thee so!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sirens" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sirens</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The sea is lonely, the sea is dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea is restless and uneasy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seekest quiet, thou art weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering thou knowest not whither;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our little isle is green and breezy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and rest thee! Oh come hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to this peaceful home of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The low west-wind creeps panting up the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be at rest among the flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of rest, the green moss lifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the dark waves of the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw in and out of rocky rifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling solemnly to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With voices deep and hollow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">‘To the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follow! Oh, follow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be at rest forevermore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Forevermore!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look how the gray old Ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the depth of his heart rejoices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaving with a gentle motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he hears our restful voices;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>List how he sings in an undertone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chiming with our melody;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all sweet sounds of earth and air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melt into one low voice alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That murmurs over the weary sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seems to sing from everywhere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Here mayst thou harbor peacefully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here mayst thou rest from the aching oar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turn thy curved prow ashore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in our green isle rest forevermore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Forevermore!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Echo half wakes in the wooded hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to her heart so calm and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Murmurs over in her sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubtfully pausing and murmuring still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">‘Evermore!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thus, on Life’s weary sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Heareth the marinere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Voices sweet, from far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ever singing low and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ever singing longingly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Is it not better here to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to be toiling late and soon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dreary night to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing but the blood-red moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go up and down into the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, in the loneliness of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see the still seals only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solemnly lift their faces gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making it yet more lonely?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it not better than to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the sliding of the wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the plank, and feel so near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cold and lonely grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A restless grave, where thou shalt lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in death unquietly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look down beneath thy wave-worn bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lean over the side and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaden eye of the sidelong shark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Upturnèd patiently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever waiting there for thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look down and see those shapeless forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever keep their dreamless sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far down within the gloomy deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only stir themselves in storms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising like islands from beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snorting through the angry spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the frail vessel perisheth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the whirls of their unwieldy play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look down! Look down!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the seaweed, slimy and dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That waves its arms so lank and brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Beckoning for thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look down beneath thy wave-worn bark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Into the cold depth of the sea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look down! Look down!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thus, on Life’s lonely sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Heareth the marinere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Voices sad, from far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ever singing full of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ever singing drearfully.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Here all is pleasant as a dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind scarce shaketh down the dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green grass floweth like a stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Into the ocean’s blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Listen! Oh, listen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here is a gush of many streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A song of many birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every wish and longing seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lulled to a numbered flow of words⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Listen! Oh, listen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here ever hum the golden bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath full-blossomed trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once with glowing fruit and flowers crowned;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So smooth the sand, the yellow sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy keel will not grate as it touches the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All around with a slumberous sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The singing waves slide up the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, where the smooth, wet pebbles be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waters gurgle longingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As If they fain would seek the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be at rest from the ceaseless roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be at rest forevermore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Forevermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thus, on Life’s gloomy sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Heareth the marinere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Voices sweet, from far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ever singing in his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">‘Here is rest and peace for thee!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-feeling" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Feeling</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The flowers and the grass to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are eloquent reproachfully;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For would they wave so pleasantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or look so fresh and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If a man, cunning, hollow, mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or one in anywise unclean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were looking on them there?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">No; he hath grown so foolish-wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cannot see with childhood’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath forgot that purity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lowliness which are the key</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nature’s mysteries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No; he hath wandered off so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his own place of birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he hath lost his mother-tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like one come from far-off lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetting and forgot, he stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his mother’s hearth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-beggar" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Beggar</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A beggar through the world am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From place to place I wander by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill up my pilgrim’s scrip for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Christ’s sweet sake and charity!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A little of thy steadfastness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bounded with leafy gracefulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old oak, give me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the world’s blasts may round me blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I yield gently to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While my stout-hearted trunk below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And firm-set roots unshaken be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some of thy stern, unyielding might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enduring still through day and night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rude tempest-shock and withering blight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may keep at bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The changeful April sky of chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strong tide of circumstance⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me, old granite gray.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some of thy pensiveness serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of thy never-dying green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put in this scrip of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That griefs may fall like snowflakes light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deck me in a robe of white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to be an angel bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O sweetly mournful pine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A little of thy merriment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy sparkling, light content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me, my cheerful brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may still be full of glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gladsomeness, where’er I be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though fickle fate hath prisoned me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some neglected nook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye have been very kind and good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, since I’ve been in the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye have gone nigh to fill my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But good-by, kind friends, every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve far to go ere set of sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all good things I would have part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day was high ere I could start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so my journey’s scarce begun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Heaven help me! how could I forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beg of thee, dear violet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of thy modesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blossoms here as well, unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if before the world thou’dst been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, give, to strengthen me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="serenade" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Serenade</h2>
			<p>
				<span>From the close-shut windows gleams no spark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night is chilly, the night is dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poplars shiver, the pine-trees moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hair by the autumn breeze is blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under thy window I sing alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, alone, ah woe! alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The darkness is pressing coldly around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The windows shake with a lonely sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars are hid and the night is drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart of silence throbs in thine ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy chamber thou sittest alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, alone, ah woe! alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The world is happy, the world is wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind hearts are beating on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, why should we lie so coldly curled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone in the shell of this great world?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should we any more be alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, alone, ah woe! alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, ’tis a bitter and dreary word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The saddest by man’s ear ever heard!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We each are young, we each have a heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why stand we ever coldly apart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must we forever, then, be alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, alone, ah woe! alone!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="irene" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Irené</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Hers is a spirit deep, and crystal-clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calmly beneath her earnest face it lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free without boldness, meek without a fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quicker to look than speak its sympathies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far down into her large and patient eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gaze, deep-drinking of the infinite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, in the mid-watch of a clear, still night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I look into the fathomless blue skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So circled lives she with Love’s holy light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the shade of self she walketh free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden of her soul still keepeth she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Eden where the snake did never enter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hath a natural, wise sincerity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A simple truthfulness, and these have lent her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dignity as moveless as the centre;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that no influence of our earth can stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her steadfast courage, nor can take away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holy peacefulness, which night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto her queenly soul doth minister.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Most gentle is she; her large charity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(An all unwitting, childlike gift in her)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not freer is to give than meek to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though herself not unacquaint with care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath in her heart wide room for all that be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her heart that hath no secrets of its own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But open is as eglantine full blown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloudless forever is her brow serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking calm hope and trust within her, whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welleth a noiseless spring of patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That keepeth all her life so fresh, so green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full of holiness, that every look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatness of her woman’s soul revealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto me bringeth blessing, and a feeling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when I read in God’s own holy book.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A graciousness in giving that doth make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The small’st gift greatest, and a sense most meek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of worthiness, that doth not fear to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From others, but which always fears to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its thanks in utterance, for the giver’s sake;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep religion of a thankful heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which rests instinctively in Heaven’s clear law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a full peace, that never can depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its own steadfastness;⁠—a holy awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For holy things⁠—not those which men call holy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But such as are revealèd to the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a true woman’s soul bent down and lowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the face of daily mysteries;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love that blossoms soon, but ripens slowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the full goldenness of fruitful prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enduring with a firmness that defies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All shallow tricks of circumstance and time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a sure insight knowing where to cling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where it clingeth never withering;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are Irené’s dowry, which no fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can shake from their serene, deep-builded state.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In-seeing sympathy is hers, which chasteneth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No less than loveth, scorning to be bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fear of blame, and yet which ever hasteneth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pour the balm of kind looks on the wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they be wounds which such sweet teaching makes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving itself a pang for others’ sakes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No want of faith, that chills with sidelong eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath she; no jealousy, no Levite pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That passeth by upon the other side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in her soul there never dwelt a lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right from the hand of God her spirit came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unstained, and she hath ne’er forgotten whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It came, nor wandered far from thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But laboreth to keep her still the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to her place of birth, that she may not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soil her white raiment with an earthly spot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet sets she not her soul so steadily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above, that she forgets her ties to earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her whole thought would almost seem to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to make glad one lowly human hearth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with a gentle courage she doth strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thought and word and feeling so to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to make earth next heaven; and her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herein doth show its most exceeding worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, bearing in our frailty her just part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hath not shrunk from evils of this life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hath gone calmly forth into the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all its sins and sorrows hath withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lofty strength of patient womanhood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this I love her great soul more than all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, being bound, like us, with earthly thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She walks so bright and heaven-like therein⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too wise, too meek, too womanly, to sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Like a lone star through riven storm-clouds seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sailors, tempest-tost upon the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling of rest and peaceful heavens nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto my soul her star-like soul hath been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sight as full of hope and calm to me;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she unto herself hath builded high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A home serene, wherein to lay her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s noblest thing, a Woman perfected.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lost-child" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lost Child</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I wandered down the sunny glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever mused, my love, of thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts, like little children, played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As gayly and as guilelessly.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If any chanced to go astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moaning in fear of coming harms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope brought the wanderer back alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Safe nestled in her snowy arms.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From that soft nest the happy one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looked up at me and calmly smiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its hair shone golden in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made it seem a heavenly child.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dear Hope’s blue eyes smiled mildly down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blest it with a love so deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, like a nursling of her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It clasped her neck and fell asleep.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-church" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Church</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I love the rites of England’s church;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I love to hear and see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The priest and people reading slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The solemn Litany;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love to hear the glorious swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chanted psalm and prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the deep organ’s bursting heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throb through the shivering air.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Chants, that a thousand years have heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I love to hear again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For visions of the olden time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wakened by the strain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gorgeous hues the window-glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seems suddenly to glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rich and red the streams of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down through the chancel flow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then I murmur, “Surely God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delighteth here to dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the temple of his Son</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he doth love so well;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when I hear the creed which saith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This church alone is His,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel within my soul that He</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath purer shrines than this.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For his is not the builded church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor organ-shaken dome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every thing that lovely is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loves and hath his home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most in soul that loveth well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things which he hath made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing no creed but simple faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may not be gainsaid.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His church is universal Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whoso dwells therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall need no customed sacrifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wash away his sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And music in its aisles shall swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lives upright and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet as dreamed sounds of angel-harps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down-quivering through the blue.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They shall not ask a litany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souls that worship there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every look shall be a hymn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every word a prayer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their service shall be written bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In calm and holy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every day from fragrant hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit incense shall arise.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-unlovely" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Unlovely</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The pretty things that others wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look strange and out of place on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never seem dressed tastefully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when I would most pleasing seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deck myself with joyful care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find it is an idle dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I put roses in my hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bloom as if in mockery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature denies her sympathy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! I have a warm, true heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I show it people stare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must forever dwell apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am least happy being where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearts of others are most light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strive to keep me out of sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glad ones often give a glance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I am sitting lonely there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That asks me why I do not dance⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if to smile on them I dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that my heart with love runs o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They say: “What is she laughing for?”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love scorned or misinterpreted⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is the hardest thing to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I often wish that I were dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In joy or grief I must not share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For neither smiles nor tears on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will ever look becomingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whole days I sit alone and cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my grave I wish I were⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet none will weep me if I die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My grave will be so lone and bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear to think of those dark hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For none will plant it o’er with flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will not in the summer come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak kind words above me there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me the grave will be no home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I am not fair.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="love-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love-Song</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Nearer to thy mother-heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Simple Nature, press me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me know thee as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill my soul and bless me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have loved thee long and well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have loved thee heartily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I never with thee dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never be at one with thee?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Inward, inward to thy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindly Nature, take me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely even as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of loving make me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest naught of dead-cold forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowest naught of littleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifeful Truth thy being warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Majesty and earnestness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Homeward, homeward to thy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearest Nature, call me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let no halfness, no mean part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any longer thrall me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be thy lover true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be a faithful soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then circle me, then look me through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill me with the mighty Whole.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-all-things-are-sad" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">All Things Are Sad</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">All things are sad:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go and ask of Memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she tell sweet tales to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make me glad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she takes me by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leadeth to old places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showeth the old faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her hazy mirage-land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, her voice is sweet and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her eyes are fresh to mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">As the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Gleaming through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The half-unfolded Eglantine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long ago, long ago!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I feel that I am only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet more sad, and yet more lonely!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then I turn to blue-eyed Hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beg of her that she will ope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her golden gates for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is fair and full of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she hath the form and face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her mother Memory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear as air her glad voice ringeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyous are the songs she singeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I hear them mournfully;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are songs her mother taught her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crooning to her infant daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she lay upon her knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many little ones she bore me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe is me! in by-gone hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who danced along and sang before me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattering my way with flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">One by one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">They are gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their silent graves are seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shining fresh with mosses green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the rising sunbeams slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the dewy land of Hope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But, when sweet Memory faileth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hope looks strange and cold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When youth no more availeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Grief grows over bold;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When softest winds are dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summer sunlight weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweetest things uncheery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">We know not why:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the crown of our desires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighs upon the brow and tires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And we would die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Die for, ah! we know not what,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something we seem to have forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something we had, and now have not;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the present is a weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the future seems our foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with shrinking eyes we wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who dreads a sudden blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark, he knows not whence;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Love at last his bright eye closes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bloom upon his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lends him such a living grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a shadow from the roses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith we have decked his bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he once was passing dear;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we feel a leaden sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nothingness and impotence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Till we grow mad⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Then the body saith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">“There’s but one true faith;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">All things are sad!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-love-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Love-Dream</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Pleasant thoughts come wandering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thou art far, from thee to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On their silver wings they bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A very peaceful ecstasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A feeling of eternal spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Winter half forgets</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Everything but that thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in his bewildered heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dreameth of the violets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or those bluer flowers that ope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flowers of steadfast love and hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watered by the living wells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of memories dear, and dearer prophecies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When young spring forever dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the sunshine of thine eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I have most holy dreams of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All night I have such dreams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when I awake, reality</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No whit the darker seems;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the twin gates of Hope and Memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They pour in crystal streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From out an angel’s calmèd eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, from twilight till sunrise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far away in the upper deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poised upon his shining wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over us his watch doth keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as he watcheth, ever sings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Through the still night I hear him sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Down-looking on our sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hear his clear, clear harp-strings ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as the golden notes take wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gently downward hovering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For very joy I weep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He singeth songs of holy Love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That quiver through the depths afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the blessèd spirits are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lingeringly from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shower till the morning star</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His silver shield hath buckled on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sentinels the dawn alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quivering his gleamy spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the dusky atmosphere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Almost, my love, I fear the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When that blessèd voice shall cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest it should leave me quite forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stript of my snowy robe of peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet the bright reality</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is fairer than all dreams can be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, through my spirit, all day long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ring echoes of that angel-song</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In melodious thoughts of thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well I know it cannot die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till eternal morn shall break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, through life’s slumber, thou and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will keep it for each other’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it shall not be silent when we wake.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fourth-of-july-ode" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fourth of July Ode</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our fathers fought for Liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They struggled long and well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">History of their deeds can tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But did they leave us free?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Are we free from vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free from pride, and free from self,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free from love of power and pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From everything that’s beggarly?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Are we free from stubborn will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From low hate and malice small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From opinion’s tyrant thrall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are none of us our own slaves still?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Are we free to speak our thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be happy, and be poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free to enter Heaven’s door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live and labor as we ought?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Are we then made free at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fear of what men say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free to reverence To-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from the slavery of the Past?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our fathers fought for liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They struggled long and well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">History of their deeds can tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <i>ourselves</i> must set us free.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="sphinx" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sphinx</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Why mourn we for the golden prime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When our young souls <i>were</i> kingly, strong, and true?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The soul is greater than all time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It changes not, but yet is ever new.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">But that the soul <i>is</i> noble, we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could never know what nobleness had been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Be what ye dream! and earth shall see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater greatness than she e’er hath seen.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The flower pines not to be fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It never asketh to be sweet and dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But gives itself to sun and air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so is fresh and full from year to year.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Nothing in Nature weeps its lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing, save man, abides in memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Forgetful that the Past is what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves may choose the coming time to be.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">All things are circular; the Past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was given us to make the Future great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the void Future shall at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be the strong rudder of an after fate.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">We sit beside the Sphinx of Life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We gaze into its void, unanswering eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And spend ourselves in idle strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To read the riddle of their mysteries.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Arise! be earnest and be strong!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sphinx’s eyes shall suddenly grow clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And speak as plain to thee ere long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the dear maiden’s who holds thee most dear.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The meaning of all things in <i>us</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, in the lives we give our souls⁠—doth lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Make, then, their meaning glorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such a life as need not fear to die!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">There is no heart-beat in the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bears a record of the smallest deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But holds within its faith alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which in doubt we vainly strive to read.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">One seed contains another seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that a third, and so for evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And promise of as great a deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies folded in the deed that went before.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">So ask not fitting space or time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could not dream of things which could not be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Each day shall make the next sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Time be swallowed in Eternity.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">God bless the Present! it is <b>all</b>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It has been Future, and it shall be Past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Awake and live! thy strength recall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in one trinity unite them fast.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Action and Life⁠—lo! here the key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all on earth that seemeth dark and wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Win this⁠—and, with it, freely ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May enter that bright realm for which ye long.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Then all these bitter questionings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall with a full and blessèd answer meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Past worlds, whereof the Poet sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be the earth beneath his snow-white fleet.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="disappointment" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Disappointment</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I pray thee call not this society;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I asked for bread, thou givest me a stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am an hungered, and I find not one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give me meat, to joy or grieve with me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find not here what I went out to see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls of true men, of women who can move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deeper, better part of us to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls that can hold with mine communion free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! must then these hopes, these longings high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This yearning of the soul for brotherhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that makes us pure, and wise, and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come broken-hearted, home again to die?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, Hope is left, and prays with bended head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give us this day, O God, our daily bread!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="great-human-nature-whither-art-thou-fled" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Great Human Nature, Whither Art Thou Fled?</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Great human nature, whither art thou fled?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are these things creeping forth and back agen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These hollow formalists and echoes, men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou entombèd with the mighty dead?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In God’s name, no! not yet hath all been said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or done, or longed for, that is truly great;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These pitiful dried crusts will never sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Natures for which pure Truth is daily bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were not meant to plod along the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange to ourselves and to our fellows strange;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were not meant to struggle from our birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To skulk and creep, and in mean pathways range;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Act! with stern truth, large faith, and loving will!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up and be doing! God is with us still.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-friend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Friend</h2>
			<p>
				<span>One strip of bark may feed the broken tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving to some few limbs a sickly green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one light shower on the hills, I ween,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May keep the spring from drying utterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus seemeth it with these our hearts to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope is the strip of bark, the shower of rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so they are not wholly crushed with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But live and linger on, far sadder sight to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much do they err, who tell us that the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not be broken; what, then, can we call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A broken heart, if this may not be so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This death in life, when, shrouded in its pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shunning and shunned, it dwelleth all apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its power, its love, its sympathy laid low?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="so-may-it-be-but-let-it-not-be-so" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">So May It Be, but Let It Not Be So</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So may it be, but let it not be so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, let it not be so with thee, my friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be of good courage, bear up to the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on thine after way rejoicing go!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We all must suffer, if we aught would know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life is a teacher stern, and wisdom’s crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is oft a crown of thorns, whence, trickling down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood, mixed with tears, blinding her eyes doth flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Time, a gentle nurse, shall wipe away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This bloody sweat, and thou shalt find on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That woman is not all in all to Love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, living by a new and second birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy soul shall see all things below, above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow bright and brighter to the perfect day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="o-child-of-nature-o-most-meek-and-free" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">O Child of Nature! O Most Meek and Free</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O child of Nature! O most meek and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most gentle spirit of true nobleness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou doest not a worthy deed the less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the world may not its greatness see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What were a thousand triumphings to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, in thyself, art as a perfect sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapt in a bright and natural atmosphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty-souledness and majesty?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy soul is not too high for lowly things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feels not its strength seeing its brother weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for itself unto itself is dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for that it may guide the wanderings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fellow-men, and to their spirits speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty faith of heart that knows no fear.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To ⸺⁠</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Deem it no Sodom-fruit of vanity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fickle fantasy of unripe youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ever takes the fairest shows for truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should wish my verse beloved of thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis love’s deep thirst which may not quenchèd be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a gulf of longing and unrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wild love-craving not to be represt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto, in all our hearts, as to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The streams of feeling do forever flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore it is that thy well-meted praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falleth so shower-like and fresh on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling those springs which else had sunk full low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in the dreary desert-sands of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or parched by passion’s fierce and withering blaze.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="might-i-but-be-beloved-and-o-most-fair" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Might I but Be Beloved, and, O Most Fair</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Might I but be beloved, and, O most fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perfect-ordered soul, beloved of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How should I feel a cloud of earthly care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thy blue eyes were ever clear to me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O woman’s love! O flower most bright and rare!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blossom’st brightest in extremest need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe, woe is me! that thy so precious seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ever sown by Fancy’s changeful air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grows sometimes in poor and barren hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can be little even in the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy meek holiness⁠—while souls more great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are left to wander in a starless night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying unheard⁠—and yet the hardest parts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Befit those best who best can cope with Fate.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="why-should-we-ever-weary-of-this-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Why Should We Ever Weary of This Life?</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Why should we ever weary of this life?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our souls should widen ever, not contract,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow stronger, and not harder, in the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling each moment with a noble act;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we live thus, of vigor all compact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doing our duty to our fellow-men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And striving rather to exalt our race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than our poor selves, with earnest hand or pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall erect our names a dwelling-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which not all ages shall cast down agen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offspring of Time shall then be born each hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, as of old, earth lovingly shall guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live forever in youth’s perfect flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guide her future children Heavenward.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="green-mountains" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Green Mountains</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ye mountains, that far off lift up your heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen dimly through their canopies of blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shade of my unrestful spirit sheds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distance-created beauty over you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not well content with this far view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How may I know what foot of loved-one treads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your rocks moss-grown and sun-dried torrent beds?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We should love all things better, if we knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What claims the meanest have upon our hearts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance even now some eye, that would be bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet my own, looks on your mist-robed forms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance your grandeur a deep joy imparts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To souls that have encircled mine with light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O brother-heart, with thee my spirit warms!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="my-friend-adown-lifes-valley-hand-in-hand" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">My Friend, Adown Life’s Valley, Hand in Hand</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My friend, adown Life’s valley, hand in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grateful change of grave and merry speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or song, our hearts unlocking each to each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll journey onward to the silent land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when stern Death shall loose that loving band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking in his cold hand a hand of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one shall strew the other’s grave with flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall his heart a moment be unmanned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friend and brother! if thou goest first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou no more re-visit me below?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, when my heart seems happy, causelessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swells, not dreaming why, as it would burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy unspeakable⁠—my soul shall know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou, unseen, art bending over me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="verse-cannot-say-how-beautiful-thou-art" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Verse Cannot Say How Beautiful Thou Art</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Verse cannot say how beautiful thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How glorious the calmness of thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of unconquerable energies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling that thou hast acted well thy part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt or fear thy steady faith can start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No thought of evil dare come nigh to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hast the courage meek of purity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-stayed greatness of a loving heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong with serene, enduring fortitude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er thou art, that seems thy fitting place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not of forms, but Nature, art thou child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lowest things put on a noble grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When touched by ye, O patient, Ruth-like, mild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spotless hands of earnest womanhood.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-soul-would-fain-its-loving-kindness-tell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">The Soul Would Fain Its Loving Kindness Tell</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The soul would fain its loving kindness tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But custom hangs like lead upon the tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart is brimful, hollow crowds among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it finds one whose life and thought are well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the eyes its gushing love doth swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The angel cometh and the waters move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet it is fearful still to say “I love,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And words come grating as a jangled bell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O might we only speak but what we feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might the tongue pay but what the heart doth owe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Heaven’s great thunder, when, deep peal on peal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shakes the earth, could rouse our spirits so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to the soul such majesty reveal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As two short words half-spoken faint and low!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-saw-a-gate-a-harsh-voice-spake-and-said" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Saw a Gate: A Harsh Voice Spake and Said</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I saw a gate: a harsh voice spake and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is the gate of Life;” above was writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Leave hope behind, all ye who enter it;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shrank my heart within itself for dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, softer than the summer rain is shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words dropt upon my soul, and they did say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fear nothing, Faith shall save thee, watch and pray!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, without fear I lifted up my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! that writing was not, one fair word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was carven in its stead, and it was “Love.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rained once more those sweet tones from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With healing on their wings: I humbly heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am the Life, ask and it shall be given!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am the way, by me ye enter Heaven!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-would-not-have-this-perfect-love-of-ours" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Would Not Have This Perfect Love of Ours</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I would not have this perfect love of ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow from a single root, a single stem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing no goodly fruit, but only flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That idly hide life’s iron diadem:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It should grow alway like that Eastern tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose limbs take root and spread forth constantly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That love for one, from which there doth not spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide love for all, is but a worthless thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in another world, as poets prate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwell we apart above the tide of things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High floating o’er earth’s clouds on faery wings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But our pure love doth ever elevate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a holy bond of brotherhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All earthly things, making them pure and good.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-dark-narrow-house-where-loved-ones-go" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">To the Dark, Narrow House Where Loved Ones Go</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To the dark, narrow house where loved ones go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence no steps outward turn, whose silent door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None but the sexton knocks at any more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are they not sometimes with us yet below?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The longings of the soul would tell us so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although, so pure and fine their being’s essence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our bodily eyes are witless of their presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not within the tomb their spirits glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wizard lamps pent up, but whensoever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With great thoughts worthy of their high behests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our souls are filled, those bright ones with us be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, in the patriarch’s tent, his angel guests;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let us live so worthily, that never</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We may be far from that blest company.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-fain-would-give-to-thee-the-loveliest-things" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Fain Would Give to Thee the Loveliest Things</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I fain would give to thee the loveliest things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lovely things belong to thee of right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast been as peaceful to my sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the still thoughts that summer twilight brings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the shadow of thine angel wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let me live! O let me rest in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growing to thee more and more utterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upbearing and upborn, till outward things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are only as they share in thee a part!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look kindly on me, let thy holy eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bless me from the deep fulness of thy heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall my soul in its right strength arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nevermore shall pine and shrink and start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe-sheltered in thy full souled sympathies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="much-i-had-mused-of-love-and-in-my-soul" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Much I Had Mused of Love, and in My Soul</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Much I had mused of Love, and in my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was one chamber where I dared not look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much its dark and dreary voidness shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirit, feeling that I was not whole:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my deep longings flowed toward one goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For long, long years, but were not answerèd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Hope was drooping, Faith well-nigh stone-dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was still a blind, earth-delving mole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet did I know that God was wise and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would fulfil my being late or soon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was such thought in vain, for, seeing thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Love rose up, as, o’er a black pine wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round, bright, and clear, upstarteth the full moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling my soul with glory utterly.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sayest-thou-most-beautiful-that-thou-wilt-wear" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Sayest Thou, Most Beautiful, That Thou Wilt Wear</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Sayest thou, most beautiful, that thou wilt wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowers and leafy crowns when thou art old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that thy heart shall never grow so cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they shall love to wreath thy silvered hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And into age’s snows the hope of spring-tide bear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, in thy child-like wisdom’s moveless hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwell ever! still the blessings manifold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purity, of peace, and untaught care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For other’s hearts, around thy pathway shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt have a crown of deathless flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glorify and guard thy blessèd head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give their freshness to thy life’s last hours;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when the Bridegroom calleth, they shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wedding-garment white as snow for thee.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="poet-who-sittest-in-thy-pleasant-room" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Poet! Who Sittest in Thy Pleasant Room</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Poet! who sittest in thy pleasant room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warming thy heart with idle thoughts of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of a holy life that leads above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striving to keep life’s spring-flowers still in bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lingering to snuff their fresh perfume⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, there were other duties meant for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to sit down in peacefulness and Be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, there are brother-hearts that dwell in gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls loathsome, foul, and black with daily sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So crusted o’er with baseness, that no ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven’s blessed light may enter in!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come down, then, to the hot and dusty way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lead them back to hope and peace again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, save in Act, thy Love is all in vain.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="no-more-but-so" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">“No More but So?”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>No more but so? Only with uncold looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a hand not laggard to clasp mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think’st thou to pay what debt of love is thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more but so? Like gushing water-brooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshening and making green the dimmest nooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy friend’s soul thy kindliness should flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if ’tis bounded by not saying “no,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can find more of friendship in my books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All lifeless though they be, and more, far more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every simplest moss, or flower, or tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open to me thy heart of hearts’ deep core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or never say that I am dear to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call me not Friend, if thou keep close the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That leads into thine inmost sympathy.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-voice-heard-in-mount-auburn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Voice Heard in Mount Auburn</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Like the low warblings of a leaf-hid bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy voice came to me through the screening trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing the simplest, long-known melodies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had no glimpse of thee, and yet I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blest thee for each clearly-carolled word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I longed to thank thee, and my heart would frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mary or Ruth, some sisterly, sweet name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee, yet could I not my lips have stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew that thou wert lovely, that thine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were blue and downcast, and methought large tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknown to thee, up to their lids must rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With half-sad memories of other years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to thyself alone thou sangest o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words that to childhood seemed to say “No More!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-reading-spenser-again" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Reading Spenser Again</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Dear, gentle Spenser! thou my soul dost lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little child again, through Fairy land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By many a bower and stream of golden sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a sunny plain whose light doth breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sunshine in my happy heart, and feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fancy with sweet visions; I become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knight, and with my charmèd arms would roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek for fame in many a wondrous deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of high emprize⁠—for I have seen the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Una’s angel’s face, the golden hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And backward eyes of startled Florimel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for their holy sake, I would outdare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A host of cruel Paynims in the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Archimage and all the powers of Hell.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="XXXX" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Light of Mine Eyes! with Thy So Trusting Look</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Light of mine eyes! with thy so trusting look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy sweet smile of charity and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from a treasure well uplaid above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from a hope in Christ its blessing took;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light of my heart! which, when it could not brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coldness of another’s sympathy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds ever a deep peace and stay in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm as the sunshine of a mossy nook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light of my soul! who, by thy saintliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faith that acts itself in daily life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst raise me above weakness, and canst bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hardest thraldom of my earthly strife⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dare not say how much thou art to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to myself⁠—and O, far less to thee!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="XXXX" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Silent as One Who Treads on New-Fallen Snow</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Silent as one who treads on new-fallen snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love came upon me ere I was aware;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not light of heart, for there was troublous care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his eyelids, drooping them full low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with sad memory of a healèd woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold rain shivered in his golden hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if an outcast lot had been his share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he seemed doubtful whither he should go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he fell on my neck, and, in my breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hiding his face, awhile sobbed bitterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As half in grief to be so long distrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half in joy at his security⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last, uplooking from his place of rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes shone blessedness and hope on me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="XXXX" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">A Gentleness That Grows of Steady Faith</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A gentleness that grows of steady faith;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A joy that sheds its sunshine everywhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A humble strength and readiness to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those burthens which strict duty ever lay’th</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our souls;⁠—which unto sorrow saith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here is no soil for thee to strike thy roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here only grow those sweet and precious fruits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ripen for the soul that well obey’th;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A patience which the world can neither give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor take away; a courage strong and high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dares in simple usefulness to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And without one sad look behind to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that day comes;⁠—these tell me that our love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is building for itself a home above.<ins title="quote mark missing in original">”</ins></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="XXXX" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">When the Glad Soul Is Full to Overflow</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When the glad soul is full to overflow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the tongue all power it denies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only trusts its secret to the eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, by an inborn wisdom, it doth know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no other eloquence but so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when the tongue’s weak utterance doth suffice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prisoned within the body’s cell it lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering in tears its exiled woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That word which all mankind so long to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bears the spirit back to whence it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maketh this sullen clay as crystal clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will not be enclouded in a name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a truth which we can feel and see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is as boundless as Eternity.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-evening-star" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Evening-Star</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When we have once said lowly “Evening-Star!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words give no more⁠—for, in thy silver pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shinest as naught else can shine beside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thick smoke, coiling round the sooty bar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever, and the customed lamp-light mar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stillness of my thought⁠—seeing things glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So samely:⁠—then I ope my windows wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gaze in peace to where thou shin’st afar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind that comes across the faint-white snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So freshly, and the river dimly seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem like new things that never had been so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before; and thou art bright as thou hast been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thy white rays put sweetness in the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the first souls that loved in Paradise.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="reading" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Reading</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As one who on some well-known landscape looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be it alone, or with some dear friend nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each day beholdeth fresh variety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New harmonies of hills, and trees, and brooks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is it with the worthiest choice of books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oftenest read: if thou no meaning spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deem there is meaning wanting in thine eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are so lured from judgment by the crooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And winding ways of covert fantasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or turned unwittingly down beaten tracks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our foregone conclusions, that we see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our own want, the writer’s misdeemed lacks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is with true books as with Nature, each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New day of living doth new insight teach.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-after-a-snow-storm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To ⸻, After a Snow-Storm</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Blue as thine eyes the river gently flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between his banks, which, far as eye can see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are whiter than aught else on earth may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save inmost thoughts that in thy soul repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trees all crystalled by the melted snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkle with gems and silver, such as we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In childhood saw ‘mong groves of Faërie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dear skies are sunny-blue as those;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still as thy heart, when next mine own it lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In love’s full safety, is the bracing air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth is all enwrapt with draperies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snow-white as that pure love might choose to wear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O for one moment’s look into thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share the joy such scene would kindle there!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="edith" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Edith</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A Lily with its frail cup filled with dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down-bending modestly, snow-white and pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shedding faint fragrance round its native vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minds me of thee, Sweet Edith, mild and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of thy eyes so innocent and blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heart is fearful as a startled hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet hath in it a fortitude to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Love’s sake, and a gentle faith which grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Love: need of a stay whereon to lean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt in thyself, hath taught thee to uphold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And comfort others, and to give, unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kindness thy still love cannot withhold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maiden, I would my sister thou hadst been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That round thee I my guarding arms might fold.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rose" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rose</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My ever-lightsome, ever-laughing Rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who always speakest first and thinkest last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy full voice is as clear as bugle-blast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right from the ear down to the heart it goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And says, “I’m beautiful! as who but knows?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy name reminds me of old romping days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of kisses stolen in dark passage-ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in the parlor, if the mother-nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave sign of drowsy watch. I wonder where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are gone thy tokens, given with a glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So full of everlasting love till morrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a day’s endless grieving for the dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last night denied, backed with a lock of hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spake of broken hearts and deadly sorrow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="mary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mary</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Dark hair, dark eyes⁠—not too dark to be deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full of feeling, yet enough to glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fire when angered; feelings never slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But which seem rather watching to forthleap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her full breast; a gently-flowing sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of words in common talk, a torrent-rush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever through her soul swift feelings gush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heart less ready to be gay than weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet cheerful ever; a calm matron-smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bids God bless you; a chaste simpleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With somewhat, too, of “proper pride,” in dress;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This portrait to my mind’s eye came, the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought of thee, the well-grown woman Mary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whilome a gold-haired, laughing little fairy.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="caroline" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Caroline</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A staidness sobers o’er her pretty face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which something but ill-hidden in her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a quaint look about her lips denies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lingering love of girlhood you can trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her checked laugh and half-restrainèd pace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when she bears herself most womanly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems as if a watchful mother’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept down with sobering glance her childish grace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet oftentimes her nature gushes free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As water long held back by little hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a pump, and let forth suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until, her task remembering, she stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment silent, smiling doubtfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then laughs aloud and scorns her hated bands.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="anne" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Anne</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There is a pensiveness in quiet Anne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mournful drooping of the full gray eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if she had shook hands with misery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And known some care since her short life began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her cheek is seriously pale, nigh wan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though of cheerfulness there is no lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You feel as if she must be dressed in black;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet is she not of those who, all they can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strive to be gay, and striving, seem most sad⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hers is not grief, but silent soberness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would be startled if you saw her glad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And startled if you saw her weep, no less;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She walks through life, as, on the Sabbath day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She decorously glides to church to pray.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="goe-little-booke" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">“Goe, Little Booke!”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Go little book! the world is wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s room and verge enough for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou hast learned that only pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacketh fit opportunity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which comes unbid to modesty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Go! win thy way with gentleness:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I send thee forth, my first-born child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite, quite alone, to face the stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fickle skies and pathways wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where few can keep them undefiled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thou earnest from a poet’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warm, still home, and full of rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the pleasant eyes thou art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who know and love thee best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by whose hearthstones thou wert blest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Go! knock thou softly at the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where any gentle spirits bin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell them thy tender feet are sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering so far from all thy kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask if thou may enter in.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Beg thou a cup-full from the spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Charity, in Christ’s dear name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few will deny so small a thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ask unkindly if thou came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one whose life might do thee shame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">We all are prone to go astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hopes are bright, our lives are dim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou art pure, and if they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We know thy father, and our whim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pleases not,”⁠—plead thou for him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For many are by whom all truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That speaks not in their mother-tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is stoned to death with hands unruth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hath its patient spirit wrung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold words and colder looks among.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet fear not! for skies are fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all whose souls are fair within;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt find shelter everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those to whom a different skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not a damning proof of sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But, if all others are unkind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s <i>one</i> heart whither thou canst fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For shelter from the biting wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in that home of purity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were no bitter thing to die.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-legend-of-brittany" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Legend of Brittany</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">First</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Fair as a summer dream was Margaret,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Such dream as in a poet’s soul might start,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Musing of old loves while the moon doth set:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her hair was not more sunny than her heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though like a natural golden coronet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It circled her dear head with careless art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mocking the sunshine, that would fain have lent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To its frank grace a richer ornament.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>His loved one’s eyes could poet ever speak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">So kind, so dewy, and so deep were hers⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, while he strives, the choicest phrase, too weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Their glad reflection in his spirit blurs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one may see a dream dissolve and break</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Out of his grasp when he to tell it stirs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like that sad Dryad doomed no more to bless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mortal who revealed her loveliness.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>She dwelt forever in a region bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Peopled with living fancies of her own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where naught could come but visions of delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Far, far aloof from earth’s eternal moan:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A summer cloud thrilled through with rosy light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Floating beneath the blue sky all alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her spirit wandered by itself, and won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A golden edge from some unsetting sun.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The heart grows richer that its lot is poor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">God blesses want with larger sympathies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love enters gladliest at the humble door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And makes the cot a palace with his eyes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So Margaret’s heart a softer beauty wore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And grew in gentleness and patience wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For she was but a simple herdsman’s child,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A lily chance-sown in the rugged wild.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There was no beauty of the wood or field</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But she its fragrant bosom-secret knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor any but to her would freely yield</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Some grace that in her soul took root and grew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nature to her shone as but now revealed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All rosy-fresh with innocent morning dew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And looked into her heart with dim, sweet eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That left it full of sylvan memories.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Oh, what a face was hers to brighten light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And give back sunshine with an added glow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wile each moment with a fresh delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And part of memory’s best contentment grow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh, how her voice, as with an inmate’s right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Into the strangest heart would welcome go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make it sweet, and ready to become</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of white and gracious thoughts the chosen home!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>None looked upon her but he straightway thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of all the greenest depths of country cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And into each one’s heart was freshly brought</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What was to him the sweetest time of year,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So was her every look and motion fraught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With out-of-door delights and forest lere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not the first violet on a woodland lea</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seemed a more visible gift of Spring than she.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Is love learned only out of poets’ books?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is there not somewhat in the dropping flood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the nunneries of silent nooks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in the murmured longing of the wood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That could make Margaret dream of lovelorn looks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And stir a thrilling mystery in her blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More trembly secret than Aurora’s tear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shed in the bosom of an eglatere?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Full many a sweet forewarning hath the mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Full many a whispering of vague desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere comes the nature destined to unbind</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Its virgin zone, and all its deeps inspire⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Low stirrings in the leaves, before the wind</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wake all the green strings of the forest lyre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faint heatings in the calyx, ere the rose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its warm voluptuous breast doth all unclose.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Long in its dim recesses pines the spirit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wildered and dark, despairingly alone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though many a shape of beauty wander near it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And many a wild and half-remembered tone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tremble from the divine abyss to cheer it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet still it knows that there is only one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before whom it can kneel and tribute bring.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once a happy vassal and a king.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To feel a want, yet scarce know what it is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To seek one nature that is always new,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose glance is warmer than another’s kiss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom we can bare our inmost beauty to,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor feel deserted afterwards⁠—for this</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But with our destined co-mate we can do⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such longing instinct fills the mighty scope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the young soul with one mysterious hope.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So Margaret’s heart grew brimming with the lore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of love’s enticing secrets; and although</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She had found none to cast it down before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet oft to Fancy’s chapel she would go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pay her vows⁠—and count the rosary o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of her love’s promised graces:⁠—haply so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Miranda’s hope had pictured Ferdinand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long ere the gaunt wave tossed him on the strand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A new-made star that swims the lonely gloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Unwedded yet and longing for the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose beams, the bride-gifts of the lavish groom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Blithely to crown the virgin planet run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her being was, watching to see the bloom</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of love’s fresh sunrise roofing one by one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its clouds with gold, a triumph-arch to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For him who came to hold her heart in fee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Not far from Margaret’s cottage dwelt a knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the proud Templars, a sworn celibate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose heart in secret fed upon the light</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And dew of her ripe beauty, through the grate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his close vow catching what gleams he might</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the free heaven, and cursing all too late</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cruel faith whose black walls hemmed him in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turned life’s crowning bliss to deadly sin.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For he had met her in the wood by chance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And, having drunk her beauty’s wildering spell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His heart shook like the pennon of a lance</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That quivers in a breeze’s sudden swell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thenceforth, in a close-infolded trance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From mistily golden deep to deep he fell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till earth did waver and fade far away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath the hope in whose warm arms he lay.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A dark, proud man he was, whose half-blown youth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had shed its blossoms even in opening,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaving a few that with more winning ruth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Trembling around grave manhood’s stem might cling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More sad than cheery, making, in good sooth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like the fringed gentian, a late autumn spring:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A twilight nature, braided light and gloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A youth half-smiling by an open tomb.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Fair as an angel, who yet inly wore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A wrinkled heart foreboding his near fall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who saw him alway wished to know him more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As if he were some fate’s defiant thrall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And nursed a dreaded secret at his core;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Little he loved, but power the most of all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that he seemed to scorn, as one who knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By what foul paths men choose to crawl thereto.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He had been noble, but some great deceit</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had turned his better instinct to a vice:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He strove to think the world was all a cheat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That power and fame were cheap at any price,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the sure way of being shortly great</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was even to play life’s game with loaded dice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since he had tried the honest play and found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That vice and virtue differed but in sound.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yet Margaret’s sight redeemed him for a space</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From his own thraldom; man could never be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hypocrite when first such maiden grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Smiled in upon his heart; the agony</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of wearing all day long a lying face</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fell lightly from him, and, a moment free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erect with wakened faith his spirit stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And scorned the weakness of his demon-mood.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Like a sweet wind-harp to him was her thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which would not let the common air come near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till from its dim enchantment it had caught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A musical tenderness that brimmed his ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sweetness more ethereal than aught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Save silver-dropping snatches that whilere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rained down from some sad angel’s faithful harp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cool her fallen lover’s anguish sharp.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Deep in the forest was a little dell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">High overarchèd with the leafy sweep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a broad oak, through whose gnarled roots there fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A slender rill that sung itself to sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where its continuous toil had scooped a well</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To please the fairy folk; breathlessly deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stillness was, save when the dreaming brook</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From its small urn a drizzly murmur shook.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The wooded hills sloped upward all around</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With gradual rise, and made an even rim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So that it seemed a mighty casque unbound</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From some huge Titan’s brow to lighten him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ages ago, and left upon the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where the slow soil had mossed it to the brim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till after countless centuries it grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into this dell, the haunt of noontide dew.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Dim vistas, sprinkled o’er with sun-flecked green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wound through the thickset trunks on every side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, toward the west, in fancy might be seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A Gothic window in its blazing pride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the low sun, two arching elms between,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lit up the leaves beyond, which, autumn-dyed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With lavish hues, would into splendor start,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shaming the labored panes of richest art.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Here, leaning once against the old oak’s trunk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mordred, for such was the young Templar’s name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saw Margaret come; unseen, the falcon shrunk</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From the meek dove; sharp thrills of tingling flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made him forget that he was vowed a monk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all the outworks of his pride o’ercame:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flooded he seemed with bright delicious pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if a star had burst within his brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Such power hath beauty and frank innocence:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A flower bloomed forth, that sunshine glad to bless,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even from his love’s long leafless stem; the sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of exile from Hope’s happy realm grew less,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thoughts of childish peace, he knew not whence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thronged round his heart with many an old caress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Melting the frost there into pearly dew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That mirrored back his nature’s morning-blue.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>She turned and saw him, but she felt no dread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her purity, like adamantine mail.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did so encircle her; and yet her head</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She drooped, and made her golden hair her veil,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through which a glow of rosiest lustre spread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then faded, and anon she stood all pale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As snow o’er which a blush of northern light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suddenly reddens, and as soon grows white.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>She thought of Tristrem and of Lancilot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of all her dreams, and of kind fairies’ might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And how that dell was deemed a haunted spot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Until there grew a mist before her sight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where the present was she half forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Borne backward through the realms of old delight⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, starting up awake, she would have gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet almost wished it might not be alone.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How they went home together through the wood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And how all life seemed focussed into one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thought-dazzling spot that set ablaze the blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What need to tell? Fit language there is none</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the heart’s deepest things. Who ever wooed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As in his boyish hope he would have done?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, when the soul is fullest, the hushed tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Voicelessly trembles like a lute unstrung.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But all things carry the heart’s messages</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And know it not, nor doth the heart well know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Nature hath her will; even as the bees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Blithe go-betweens, fly singing to and fro</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the fruit-quickening pollen;⁠—hard if these</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Found not some all unthought-of way to show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their secret each to each; and so they did,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one heart’s flower-dust into the other slid.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Young hearts are free; the selfish world it is</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That turns them miserly and cold as stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes them clutch their fingers on the bliss</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which but in giving truly is their own;⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She had no dreams of barter, asked not his,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But gave hers freely as she would have thrown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A rose to him, or as that rose gives forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its generous fragrance, thoughtless of its worth.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Her summer nature felt a need to bless,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a like longing to be blest again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So, from her sky-like spirit, gentleness</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Dropt ever like a sunlit fall of rain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his beneath drank in the bright caress</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As thirstily as would a parched plain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That long hath watched the showers of sloping gray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ever, ever, falling far away.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How should she dream of ill? the heart filled quite</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With sunshine, like the shepherd’s-clock at noon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Closes its leaves around its warm delight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whate’er in life is harsh or out of tune</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is all shut out, no boding shade of blight</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Can pierce the opiate ether of its swoon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love is but blind as thoughtful justice is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But naught can be so wanton-blind as bliss.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>All beauty and all life he was to her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She questioned not his love, she only knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she loved him, and not a pulse could stir</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In her whole frame but quivered through and through</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With this glad thought, and was a minister</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To do him fealty and service true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like golden ripples hasting to the land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wreck their freight of sunshine on the strand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O dewy dawn of love! that are</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hung high, like the cliff-swallow’s perilous nest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most like to fall when fullest, and that jar</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With every heavier billow! O unrest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than balmiest deeps of quiet sweeter far!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How did ye triumph now in Margaret’s breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Making it readier to shrink and start</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than quivering gold of the pond-lily’s heart!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Here let us pause: oh, would the soul might ever</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Achieve its immortality in youth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When nothing yet hath damped its high endeavor</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">After the starry energy of truth!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here let us pause, and for a moment sever</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This gleam of sunshine from the sad unruth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sometime comes to all, for it is good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To lengthen to the last a sunny mood.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Second</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As one who, from the sunshine and the green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Enters the solid darkness of a cave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor knows what precipice or pit unseen</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">May yawn before him with its sudden grave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, with hushed breath, doth often forward lean,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Dreaming he hears the plashing of a wave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dimly below, or feels a damper air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From out some dreary chasm, he knows not where;</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So, from the sunshine and the green of love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We enter on our story’s darker part;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, though the horror of it well may move</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An impulse of repugnance in the heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet let us think, that, as there’s naught above</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The all-embracing atmosphere of Art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So also there is naught that falls below</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her generous reach, though grimed with guilt and woe.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Her fittest triumph is to show that good</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lurks in the heart of evil evermore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That love, though scorned, and outcast, and withstood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Can without end forgive, and yet have store;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God’s love and man’s are of the selfsame blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And He can see that always at the door</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of foulest hearts the angel-nature yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knocks to return and cancel all its debt.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It ever is weak falsehood’s destiny</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That her thick mask turns crystal to let through</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The unsuspicious eyes of honesty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But Margaret’s heart was too sincere and true</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aught but plain truth and faithfulness to see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Mordred’s for a time a little grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be like hers, won by the mild reproof</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of those kind eyes that kept all doubt aloof.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Full oft they met, as dawn and twilight meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In northern climes; she full of growing day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he of darkness, which before her feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shrank gradual, and faded quite away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soon to return; for power had made love sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To him, and when his will had gained full sway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The taste began to pall; for never power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can sate the hungry soul beyond an hour.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He fell as doth the tempter ever fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Even in the gaining of his loathsome end;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God doth not work as man works, but makes all</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The crooked paths of ill to goodness tend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let Him judge Margaret! If to be the thrall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of love, and faith too generous to defend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its very life from him she loved, be sin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What hope of grace may the seducer win?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Grim-hearted world, that look’st with Levite eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">On those poor fallen by too much faith in man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She that upon thy freezing threshold lies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Starved to more sinning by thy savage ban,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeking that refuge because foulest vice</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">More godlike than thy virtue is, whose span</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shuts out the wretched only, is more free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To enter heaven than thou shalt ever be!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou wilt not let her wash thy dainty feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With such salt things as tears, or with rude hair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dry them, soft Pharisee, that sit’st at meat</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With him who made her such, and speak’st him fair.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaving God’s wandering lamb the while to bleat</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Unheeded, shivering in the pitiless air:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast made prisoned virtue show more wan</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And haggard than a vice to look upon.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now many months flew by, and weary grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To Margaret the sight of happy things;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blight fell on all her flowers, instead of dew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shut round her heart were now the joyous wings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherewith it wont to soar; yet not untrue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Though tempted much, her woman’s nature clings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To its first pure belief, and with sad eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looks backward o’er the gate of Paradise.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And so, though altered Mordred came less oft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And winter frowned where spring had laughed before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In his strange eyes, yet half her sadness doffed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in her silent patience loved him more:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sorrow had made her soft heart yet more soft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a new life within her own she bore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which made her tenderer, as she felt it move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath her breast, a refuge for her love.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This babe, she thought, would surely bring him back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And be a bond forever them between;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before its eyes the sullen tempest-rack</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Would fade, and leave the face of heaven serene;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And love’s return doth more than fill the lack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which in his absence withered the heart’s green:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet a dim foreboding still would flit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between her and her hope to darken it.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>She could not figure forth a happy fate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Even for this life from heaven so newly come;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The earth must needs be doubly desolate</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To him scarce parted from a fairer home:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such boding heavier on her bosom sate</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">One night, as, standing in the twilight gloam,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She strained her eyes beyond that dizzy verge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At whose foot faintly breaks the future’s surge.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Poor little spirit! naught but shame and woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nurse the sick heart whose life-blood nurses thine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet not those only; love hath triumphed so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As for thy sake makes sorrow more divine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet, though thou be pure, the world is foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To purity, if born in such a shrine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, having trampled it for struggling thence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smiles to itself, and calls it Providence.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As thus she mused, a shadow seemed to rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From out her thought, and turn to dreariness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All blissful hopes and sunny memories,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the quick blood would curdle up and press</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About her heart, which seemed to shut its eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And hush itself, as who with shuddering guess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Harks through the gloom and dreads e’en now to feel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through his hot breast the icy slide of steel.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But, at that heart-beat, while in dread she was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the low wind the honeysuckles gleam,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A dewy thrill flits through the heavy grass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And, looking forth, she saw, as in a dream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within the wood the moonlight’s shadowy mass:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Night’s starry heart yearning to hers doth seem,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the deep sky, full-hearted with the moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Folds round her all the happiness of June.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What fear could face a heaven and earth like this?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What silveriest cloud could hang ’neath such a sky?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A tide of wondrous and unwonted bliss</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Rolls back through all her pulses suddenly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if some seraph, who had learned to kiss</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From the fair daughters of the world gone by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had wedded so his fallen light with hers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such sweet, strange joy through soul and body stirs.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now seek we Mordred; he who did not fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The crime, yet fears the latent consequence:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If it should reach a brother Templar’s ear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It haply might be made a good pretence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cheat him of the hope he held most dear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For he had spared no thought’s or deed’s expense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That by and by might help his wish to clip</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its darling bride⁠—the high grandmastership.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The apathy, ere a crime resolved is done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is scarce less dreadful than remorse for crime;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By no allurement can the soul be won</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From brooding o’er the weary creep of time:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mordred stole forth into the happy sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Striving to hum a scrap of Breton rhyme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the sky struck him speechless, and he tried</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In vain to summon up his callous pride.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In the courtyard a fountain leaped alway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A Triton blowing jewels through his shell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the sunshine; Mordred turned away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Weary because the stone face did not tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of weariness, nor could he bear to-day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Heartsick, to hear the patient sink and swell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of winds among the leaves, or golden bees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drowsily humming in the orange-trees.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>All happy sights and sounds now came to him</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like a reproach: he wandered far and wide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Following the lead of his unquiet whim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But still there went a something at his side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That made the cool breeze hot, the sunshine dim;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It would not flee, it could not be defied,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He could not see it, but he felt it there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the damp chill that crept among his hair.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Day wore at last; the evening-star arose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And throbbing in the sky grew red and set;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then with a guilty, wavering step he goes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To the hid nook where they so oft had met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In happier season, for his heart well knows</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That he is sure to find poor Margaret</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Watching and waiting there with love-lorn breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Around her young dream’s rudely scattered nest.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Why follow here that grim old chronicle</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which counts the dagger-strokes and drops of blood?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enough that Margaret by his mad steel fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Unmoved by murder from her trusting mood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smiling on him as Heaven smiles on Hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With a sad love, remembering when he stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not fallen yet, the unsealer of her heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all her holy dreams the holiest part.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>His crime complete, scarce knowing what he did,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(So goes the tale,) beneath the altar there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the high church the stiffening corpse he hid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And then, to ‘scape that suffocating air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a scared ghoul out of the porch he slid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But his strained eyes saw blood-spots everywhere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ghastly faces thrust themselves between</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His soul and hopes of peace with blasting mien.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>His heart went out within him like a spark</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Dropt in the sea; wherever he made bold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To turn his eyes, he saw, all stiff and stark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Pale Margaret lying dead; the lavish gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her loose hair seemed in the cloudy dark</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To spread a glory, and a thousand-fold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More strangely pale and beautiful she grew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her silence stabbed his conscience through and through.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Or visions of past days⁠—a mother’s eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That smiled down on the fair boy at her knee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose happy upturned face to hers replies.⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He saw sometimes: or Margaret mournfully</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gazed on him full of doubt, as one who tries</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To crush belief that does love injury;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then she would wring her hands, but soon again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love’s patience glimmered out through cloudy pain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Meanwhile he dared, not go and steal away</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The silent, dead-cold witness of his sin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He had not feared the life, but that dull clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Those open eyes that showed the death within,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would surely stare him mad; yet all the day</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A dreadful impulse, whence his will could win</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No refuge, made him linger in the aisle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Freezing with his wan look each greeting smile.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now, on the second day there was to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A festival in church: from far and near</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came flocking in the sunburnt peasantry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And knights and dames with stately antique cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blazing with pomp, as if all faerie</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had emptied her quaint halls, or, as it were,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The illuminated marge of some old book,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While we were gazing, life and motion took.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When all were entered, and the roving eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of all were stayed, some upon faces bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some on the priests, some on the traceries</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That decked the slumber of a marble knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the rustlings over that arise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From recognizing tokens of delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When friendly glances meet⁠—then silent ease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spread o’er the multitude by slow degrees.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then swelled the organ: up through choir and nave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The music trembled with an inward thrill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of bliss at its own grandeur; wave on wave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Its flood of mellow thunder rose, until</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hushed air shivered with the throb it gave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then, poising for a moment, it stood still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sank and rose again, to burst in spray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wandered into silence far away.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Like to a mighty heart the music seemed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That yearns with melodies it cannot speak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until, in grand despair of what it dreamed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the agony of effort it doth break,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet triumphs breaking; on it rushed and streamed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And wantoned in its might, as when a lake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long pent among the mountains, bursts its walls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in one crowding gash leaps forth and falls.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Deeper and deeper shudders shook the air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As the huge bass kept gathering heavily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like thunder when it rouses in its lair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And with its hoarse growl shakes the low-hung sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It grew up like a darkness everywhere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Filling the vast cathedral;⁠—suddenly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the dense mass a boy’s clear treble broke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like lightning, and the full-toned choir awoke.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Through gorgeous windows shone the sun aslant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Brimming the church with gold and purple mist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meet atmosphere to bosom that rich chant.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where fifty voices in one strand did twist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their varicolored tones, and left no want</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To the delighted soul, which sank abyssed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the warm music cloud, while, far below,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The organ heaved its surges to and fro.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As if a lark should suddenly drop dead</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">While the blue air yet trembled with its song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So snapped at once that music’s golden thread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Struck by a nameless fear that leapt along</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From heart to heart, and like a shadow spread</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With instantaneous shiver through the throng,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So that some glanced behind, as half aware</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hideous shape of dread were standing there.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As when a crowd of pale men gather round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Watching an eddy in the leaden deep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From which they deem the body of one drowned</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Will be cast forth, from face to face doth creep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An eager dread that holds all tongues fast bound</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Until the horror, with a ghastly leap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Starts up, its dead blue arms stretched aimlessly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaved with the swinging of the careless sea⁠—</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So in the faces of all these there grew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As by one impulse, a dark, freezing awe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which with a fearful fascination drew</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All eyes toward the altar; damp and raw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The air grew suddenly, and no man knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whether perchance his silent neighbor saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dreadful thing which all were sure would rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To scare the strained lids wider from their eyes.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The incense trembled as it upward sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Its slow, uncertain thread of wandering blue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As’t were the only living element</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In all the church, so deep the stillness grew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It seemed one might have heard it, as it went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Give out an audible rustle, curling through</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The midnight silence of that awestruck air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More hushed than death, though so much life was there.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nothing they saw, but a low voice was heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Threading the ominous silence of that fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gentle and terrorless as if a bird,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wakened by some volcano’s glare, should cheer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The murk air with his song; yet every word</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the cathedral’s farthest arch seemed near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if it spoke to every one apart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like the clear voice of conscience in each heart.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘O Rest, to weary hearts thou art most dear!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O Silence, after life’s bewildering din,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art most welcome, whether in the sear</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Days of our age thou comest, or we win</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy poppy-wreath in youth! then wherefore here</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Linger I yet, once free to enter in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At that wished gate which gentle Death doth ope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the boundless realm of strength and hope?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘Think not in death my love could ever cease;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">If thou wast false, more need there is for me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still to be true; that slumber were not peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">If’t were unvisited with dreams of thee:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou hadst never heard such words as these,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Save that in heaven I must forever be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most comfortless and wretched, seeing this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our unbaptized babe shut out from bliss.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘This little spirit with imploring eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wanders alone the dreary wild of space;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The shadow of his pain forever lies</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Upon my soul in this new dwelling-place;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His loneliness makes me in Paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">More lonely, and, unless I see his face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even here for grief could I lie down and die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save for my curse of immortality.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘World after world he sees around him swim</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Crowded with happy souls, that take no heed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the sad eyes that from the night’s faint rim</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Gaze sick with longing on them as they speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With golden gates, that only shut on him;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And shapes sometimes from hell’s abysses freed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flap darkly by him, with enormous sweep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of wings that roughen wide the pitchy deep.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘I am a mother⁠—spirits do not shake</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This much of earth from them⁠—and I must pine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I can feel his little hands, and take</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His weary head upon this heart of mine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, might it be, full gladly for his sake</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Would I this solitude of bliss resign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And be shut out of heaven to dwell with him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forever in that silence drear and dim.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘I strove to hush my soul, and would not speak</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">At first, for thy dear sake; a woman’s love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is mighty, but a mother’s heart is weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And by its weakness overcomes; I strove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To smother bitter thoughts with patience meek,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But still in the abyss my soul would rove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeking my child, and drove me here to claim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rite that gives him peace in Christ’s dear name.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘I sit and weep while blessed spirits sing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I can but long and pine the while they praise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, leaning o’er the wall of heaven, I fling</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My voice to where I deem my infant strays,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a robbed bird that cries in vain to bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her nestlings back beneath her wings’ embrace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still he answers not, and I but know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That heaven and earth are both alike in woe.’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then the pale priests, with ceremony due,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Baptized the child within its dreadful tomb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath that mother’s heart, whose instinct true</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Star-like had battled down the triple gloom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sorrow, love, and death: young maidens, too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Strewed the pale corpse with many a milkwhite bloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And parted the bright hair, and on the breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crossed the unconscious hands in sign of rest.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Some said, that, when the priest had sprinkled o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The consecrated drops, they seemed to hear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sigh, as of some heart from travail sore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Released, and then two voices singing clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Misereatur Deus</i>, more and more</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fading far upward, and their ghastly fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell from them with that sound, as bodies fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From souls upspringing to celestial hall.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="prometheus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prometheus</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">One after one the stars have risen and set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkling upon the hoarfrost on my chain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bear, that prowled all night about the fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the North-star, hath shrunk into his den.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scared by the blithesome footsteps of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose blushing smile floods all the Orient;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now bright Lucifer grows less and less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the heaven’s blue quiet deep-withdrawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunless and starless all, the desert sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arches above me, empty as this heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ages hath been empty of all joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except to brood upon its silent hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er its hope of day the sky doth now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night have I heard voices: deeper yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep low breathing of the silence grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all about, muffled in awe, there stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadows, or forms, or both, clear-felt at heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when I turned to front them, far along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a shudder through the midnight ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dense stillness walled me closer round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still I heard them wander up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That solitude, and flappings of dusk wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did mingle with them, whether of those hags</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let slip upon me once from Hades deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of yet direr torments, if such be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could but guess; and then toward me came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shape as of a woman: very pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was, and calm; its cold eyes did not move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine moved not, but only stared on them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fixed awe went through my brain like ice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skeleton hand seemed clutching at my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a sharp chill, as if a dank night fog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly closed me in, was all I felt:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, methought, I heard a freezing sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long, deep, shivering sigh, as from blue lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stiffening in death, close to mine ear. I thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some doom was close upon me, and I looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the red moon through the heavy mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just setting, and it seemed as it were falling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or reeling to its fall, so dim and dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And palsy-struck it looked. Then all sounds merged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the rising surges of the pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, leagues below me, clothing the gaunt loins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ancient Caucasus with hairy strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent up a murmur in the morning wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad as the wail that from the populous earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day and night to high Olympus soars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit incense to thy wicked throne, O Jove!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thy hated name is tossed once more in scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off my lips, for I will tell thy doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are these tears? Nay, do not triumph, Jove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are wrung from me but by the agonies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prophecy, like those sparse drops which fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From clouds in travail of the lightning, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great wave of the storm high-curled and black</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls steadily onward to its thunderous break.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why art thou made a god of, thou poor type</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of anger, and revenge, and cunning force?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True Power was never born of brutish Strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor sweet Truth suckled at the shaggy dugs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that old she-wolf. Are thy thunderbolts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That quell the darkness for a space, so strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the prevailing patience of meek Light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, with the invincible tenderness of peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wins it to be a portion of herself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why art thou made a god of, thou, who hast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The never-sleeping terror at thy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That birthright of all tyrants, worse to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than this thy ravening bird on which I smile?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou swear’st to free me, if I will unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What kind of doom it is whose omen flits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across thy heart, as o’er a troop of doves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fearful shadow of the kite. What need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know that truth whose knowledge cannot save?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil its errand hath, as well as Good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thine is finished, thou art known no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a higher purity than thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And higher purity is greater strength;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy nature is thy doom, at which thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembles behind the thick wall of thy might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let man but hope, and thou art straightway chilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thought of that drear silence and deep night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, like a dream, shall swallow thee and thine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let man but will, and thou art god no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More capable of ruin than the gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ivory that image thee on earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who hurled down the monstrous Titan-brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blinded with lightnings, with rough thunders stunned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is weaker than a simple human thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My slender voice can shake thee, as the breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seems but apt to stir a maiden’s hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sways huge Oceanus from pole to pole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I am still Prometheus, and foreknow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my wise heart the end and doom of all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yes, I am still Prometheus, wiser grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By years of solitude⁠—that holds apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The past and future, giving the soul room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To search into itself⁠—and long commune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this eternal silence;⁠—more a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my long-suffering and strength to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With equal front the direst shafts of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou in thy faint-hearted despotism,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girt with thy baby-toys of force and wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, I am that Prometheus who brought down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light to man, which thou, in selfish fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst to thy self usurped⁠—his by sole right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Man hath right to all save Tyranny⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which shall free him yet from thy frail throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyrants are but the spawn of Ignorance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begotten by the slaves they trample on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, could they win a glimmer of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see that Tyranny is always weakness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Fear with its own bosom ill at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would laugh away in scorn the sand-wove chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which their own blindness feigned for adamant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong ever builds on quicksands, but the Right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the firm centre lays its moveless base.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tyrant trembles, if the air but stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The innocent ringlets of a child’s free hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crouches, when the thought of some great spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With world-wide murmur, like a rising gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over men’s hearts, as over standing corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushes, and bends them to its own strong will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall some thought of mine yet circle earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And puff away thy crumbling altars, Jove!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And, wouldst thou know of my supreme revenge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor tyrant, even now dethroned in heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Realmless in soul, as tyrants ever are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen! and tell me if this bitter peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This never-glutted vulture, and these chains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrink not before it; for it shall befit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sorrow-taught, unconquered Titan-heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men, when their death is on them, seem to stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a precipitous crag that overhangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The abyss of doom, and in that depth to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in a glass, the features dim and vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of things to come, the shadows, as it seems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what have been. Death ever fronts the wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not fearfully, but with clear promises</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of larger life, on whose broad vans upborne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their outlook widens, and they see beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horizon of the Present and the Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the very source and end of things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such am I now: immortal woe hath made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart a seer, and my soul a judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the substance and the shadow of Truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sure supremeness of the Beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By all the martyrdoms made doubly sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such as I am, this is my revenge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which of my wrongs builds a triumphal arch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which I see a sceptre and a throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pipings of glad shepherds on the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tending the flocks no more to bleed for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The songs of maidens pressing with white feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vintage on thine altars poured no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmurous bliss of lovers underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim grapevine bowers whose rosy bunches press</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not half so closely their warm cheeks, unpaled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thoughts of thy brute lust; the hive-like hum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of peaceful commonwealths, where sunburnt Toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reaps for itself the rich earth made its own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By its own labor, lightened with glad hymns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To an omnipotence which thy mad bolts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would cope with as a spark with the vast sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the spirit of free love and peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duty’s sure recompense through life and death⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are such harvests as all master-spirits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reap, haply not on earth, but reap no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the sheaves are bound by hands not theirs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are the bloodless daggers wherewithal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stab fallen tyrants, this their high revenge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their best part of life on earth is when,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long after death, prisoned and pent no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their thoughts, their wild dreams even, have become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the necessary air men breathe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, like the moon, herself behind a cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shed down light before us on life’s sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cheers us to steer onward still in hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth with her twining memories ivies o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their holy sepulchres; the chainless sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tempest or wide calm, repeats their thoughts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning and the thunder, all free things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have legends of them for the ears of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other glories are as falling stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But universal Nature watches theirs:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such strength is won by love of humankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Not that I feel that hunger after fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which souls of a half-greatness are beset with;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that the memory of noble deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cries shame upon the idle and the vile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keeps the heart of Man forever up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heroic level of old time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be forgot at first is little pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a heart conscious of such high intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As must be deathless on the lips of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, having been a name, to sink and be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A something which the world can do without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, having been or not, would never change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightest pulse of fate⁠—this is indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cup of bitterness the worst to taste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this thy heart shall empty to the dregs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endless despair shall be thy Caucasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And memory thy vulture; thou wilt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oblivion far lonelier than this peak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold thy destiny! Thou think’st it much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should brave thee, miserable god!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have braved a mightier than thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the sharp tempting of this soaring heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which might have made me, scarcely less than thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god among my brethren weak and blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce less than thou, a pitiable thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be down-trodden into darkness soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now I am above thee, for thou art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bungling workmanship of fear, the block</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That awes the swart Barbarian; but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am what myself have made⁠—a nature wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With finding in itself the types of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With watching from the dim verge of the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What things to be are visible in the gleams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrown forward on them from the luminous past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise with the history of its own frail heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With reverence and with sorrow, and with love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad as the world, for freedom and for man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thou and all strength shall crumble, except Love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By whom, and for whose glory, ye shall cease:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when thou’rt but a weary moaning heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the pitiless gloom of Chaos, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be a power and a memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A name to fright all tyrants with, a light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsetting as the pole-star, a great voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard in the breathless pauses of the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By truth and freedom ever waged with wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear as a silver trumpet, to awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far echoes that from age to age live on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In kindred spirits, giving them a sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of boundless power from boundless suffering wrung:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a glazing eye shall smile to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The memory of my triumph (for to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong with endurance, and to overcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present with a heart that looks beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are triumph), like a prophet eagle, perch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sacred banner of the Right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil springs up, and flowers, and bears no seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feeds the green earth with its swift decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving it richer for the growth of truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Good, once put in action or in thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a strong oak, doth from its boughs shed down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ripe germs of a forest. Thou, weak god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt fade and be forgotten! but this soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh-living still in the serene abyss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every heaving shall partake, that grows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heart to heart among the sons of men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the ominous hum before the earthquake runs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far through the Ægean from roused isle to isle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foreboding wreck to palaces and shrines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty rents in many a cavernous error</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That darkens the free light to man:⁠—This heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unscarred by thy grim vulture, as the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows but more lovely ’neath the beaks and claws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Harpies blind that fain would soil it, shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the throbbing exultations, share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wait on freedom’s triumphs, and in all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious agonies of martyr-spirits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp lightning-throes to split the jagged clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That veil the future, snowing them the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pain’s thorny crown for constancy and truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girding the temples like a wreath of stars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a thought, that, like the fabled laurel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes my faith thunder-proof; and thy dread bolts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall on me like the silent flakes of snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hoar brows of aged Caucasus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, oh, thought far more blissful, they can rend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This cloud of flesh, and make my soul a star!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Unleash thy crouching thunders now, O Jove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free this high heart, which, a poor captive long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth knock to be let forth, this heart which still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its invincible manhood, overtops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy puny godship, as this mountain doth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pines that moss its roots. Oh, even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from my peak of suffering I look down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholding with a far-spread gush of hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunrise of that Beauty, in whose face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone all around with love, no man shall look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But straightway like a god he be uplift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the throne long empty for his sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clearly oft foreshadowed in brave dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his free inward nature, which nor thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any anarch after thee, can bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From working its great doom⁠—now, now set free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This essence, not to die, but to become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of that awful Presence which doth haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palaces of tyrants, to scare off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its grim eyes and fearful whisperings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hideous sense of utter loneliness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All hope of safety, all desire of peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All but the loathed forefeeling of blank death⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of that spirit which doth ever brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In patient calm on the unpilfered nest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man’s deep heart, till mighty thoughts grow fledged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sail with darkening shadow o’er the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling with dread such souls as dare not trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the unfailing energy of Good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they swoop, and their pale quarry make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some o’erbloated wrong⁠—that spirit which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatters great hopes in the seed-field of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like acorns among grain, to grow and be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A roof for freedom in all coming time!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But no, this cannot be; for ages yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In solitude unbroken, shall I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The angry Caspian to the Euxine shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Euxine answer with a muffled roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side storming the giant walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Caucasus with leagues of climbing foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Less, from my height, than flakes of downy snow),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That draw back baffled but to hurl again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatched up in wrath and horrible turmoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mountain on mountain, as the Titans erst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brethren, scaling the high seat of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved Pelion upon Ossa’s shoulders broad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain emprise. The moon will come and go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her monotonous vicissitude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once beautiful, when I was free to walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among my fellows, and to interchange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The influence benign of loving eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now by aged use grows wearisome;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False thought! most false! for how could I endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These crawling centuries of lonely woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unshamed by weak complaining, but for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loneliest, save me, of all created things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild-eyed Astarte, my best comforter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy pale smile of sad benignity?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Year after year will pass away and seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, in mine eternal agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as the shadows of dumb summer clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I have watched so often darkening o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vast Sarmatian plain, league-wide at first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, with still swiftness, lessening on and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till cloud and shadow meet and mingle where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gray horizon fades into the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far, far to northward. Yes, for ages yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must I lie here upon my altar huge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacrifice for man. Sorrow will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it hath been, his portion; endless doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the immortal with the mortal linked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams of its wings and pines for what it dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With upward yearn unceasing. Better so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wisdom is stern sorrow’s patient child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And empire over self, and all the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong charities that make men seem like gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love, that makes them be gods, from her breasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sucks in the milk that makes mankind one blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good never comes unmixed, or so it seems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having two faces, as some images</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are carved, of foolish gods; one face is ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one heart lies beneath, and that is good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As are all hearts, when we explore their depths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, great heart, bear up; thou art but type</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what all lofty spirits endure, that fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would win men back to strength and peace through love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each hath his lonely peak, and on each heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Envy, or scorn, or hatred, tears lifelong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With vulture beak; yet the high soul is left;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faith, which is but hope grown wise, and love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And patience which at last shall overcome.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-violet-sweet-violet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Violet! Sweet Violet!</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Violet! sweet violet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine eyes are full of tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Are they wet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Even yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the thought of other years?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with gladness are they full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the night so beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longing for those far-off spheres?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Loved one of my youth thou wast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my merry youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Tearfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the fair and sunny past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All its openness and truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever fresh and green in thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the moss is in the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thy little heart, that hath with love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grown colored like the sky above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which thou lookest ever⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Can it know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All the woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hope for what returneth never,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the sorrow and the longing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these hearts of ours belonging?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Out on it! no foolish pining</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">For the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Dims thine eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or for the stars so calmly shining;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like thee let this soul of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take hue from that wherefor I long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Self-stayed and high, serene and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not satisfied with hoping⁠—but divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Violet! dear violet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy blue eyes are only wet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy and love of Him who sent thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the fulfilling sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that glad obedience</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which made thee all that Nature meant thee!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rosaline" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rosaline</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thou look’dst on me all yesternight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine eyes were blue, thy hair was bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when we murmured our troth-plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the thick stars, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy hair was braided on thy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on the day we two were wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine eyes scarce knew if thou wert dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my shrunk heart knew, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The death-watch ticked behind the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blackness rustled like a pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moaning wind did rise and fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the bleak pines, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart beat thickly in mine ears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lids may shut out fleshly fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still the spirit sees and hears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its eyes are lidless, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A wildness rushing suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knowing some ill shape is nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wish for death, a fear to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not this vengeance, Rosaline?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A loneliness that is not lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love quite withered up and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strong soul ousted from its throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wouldst thou further, Rosaline?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis drear such moonless nights as these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange sounds are out upon the breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the leaves shiver in the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then thou comest, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seem to hear the mourners go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With long black garments trailing slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plumes anodding to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once I heard them, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy shroud is all of snowy white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in the middle of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou standest moveless and upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing upon me, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no sorrow in thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But evermore that meek surprise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God! thy gentle spirit tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deem me guiltless, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Above thy grave the robin sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swarms of bright and happy things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flit all about with sunlit wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am cheerless, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The violets in the hillock toss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gravestone is o’ergrown with moss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nature feels not any loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am cheerless, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I did not know when thou wast dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blackbird whistling overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled through my brain; I would have fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dared not leave thee, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun rolled down, and very soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a great fire, the awful moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, stained with blood, and then a swoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept chilly o’er me, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The stars came out; and, one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each angel from his silver throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked down and saw what I had done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dared not hide me, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I crouched; I feared thy corpse would cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against me to God’s silent sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought I saw the blue lips try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To utter something, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I waited with a maddened grin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear that voice all icy thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slide forth and tell my deadly sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hell and heaven, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no voice came, and then it seemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, if the very corpse had screamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound like sunshine glad had streamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through that dark stillness, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then, amid the silent night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I screamed with horrible delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my brain an awful light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did seem to crackle, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is my curse! sweet memories fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From me like snow, and only all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that one night, like cold worms, crawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My doomed heart over, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why wilt thou haunt me with thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein such blessed memories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such pitying forgiveness lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than hate more bitter, Rosaline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe’s me! I know that love so high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thine, true soul, could never die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with mean clay in churchyard lie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would it might be so, Rosaline!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="allegra" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Allegra</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I would more natures were like thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That never casts a glance before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou Hebe, who thy heart’s bright wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So lavishly to all dost pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we who drink forget to pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And can but dream of bliss in store.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou canst not see a shade in life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sunward instinct thou dost rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, leaving clouds below at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gazest undazzled at the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their blazing splendors rife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A songful lark with eagle’s eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou wast some foundling whom the Hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nursed, laughing, with the milk of Mirth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some influence more gay than ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath ruled thy nature from its birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if thy natal stars were flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shook their seeds round thee on earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou, to lull thine infant rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wast cradled like an Indian child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All pleasant winds from south and west</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lullabies thine ears beguiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocking thee in thine oriole’s nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till Nature looked at thee and smiled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thine every fancy seems to borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sunlight from thy childish years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making a golden cloud of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hope-lit rainbow out of tears⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heart is certain of to-morrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though ‘yond to-day it never peers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I would more natures were like thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So innocently wild and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose sad thoughts, even, leap and shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like sunny wavelets in the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making us mindless of the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In gazing on the brilliancy.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-fountain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fountain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Into the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaping and flashing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From morn till night;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Into the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whiter than snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waving so flower-like</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the winds blow;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Into the starlight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rushing in spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy at midnight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy by day;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ever in motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blithesome and cheery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still climbing heavenward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never aweary;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Glad of all weathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still seeming best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upward or downward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Motion thy rest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full of a nature</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing can tame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed every moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever the same;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ceaseless aspiring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ceaseless content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkness or sunshine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy element;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Glorious fountain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let my heart be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh, changeful, constant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upward, like thee!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dirge" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dirge</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Poet! lonely is thy bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the turf is overhead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cold earth is thy cover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thy heart hath found release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it slumbers full of peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the rustle of green trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the warm hum of the bees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid the drowsy clover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through thy chamber, still as death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A smooth gurgle wandereth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the blue stream murmureth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the blue sky over.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three paces from the silver strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently in the fine, white sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a lily in thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pale as snow, they laid thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In no coarse earth wast thou hid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no gloomy coffin-lid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Darkly overweighed thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silently as snow-flakes drift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smooth sand did sift and sift</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er the bed they made thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sweet birds did come and sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy sunny burying⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choristers unbidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, beloved of sun and dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meek forget-me-nots upgrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thine eyes so large and blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Neath the turf were hidden.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where thy stainless clay doth lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue and open is the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the white clouds wander by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams of summer silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Darkening the river;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hearest the clear water run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ripples every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattering the golden sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through thy silence quiver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vines trail down upon the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into its smooth and glassy dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A green stillness spreading,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the shiner, perch, and bream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the shadowed waters gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Gainst the current heading.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White as snow, thy winding sheet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shelters thee from head to feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save thy pale face only;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy face is turned toward the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lids lie meekly o’er thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the low-voiced pine-tree sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er thy bed so lonely.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy life thou lov’dst its shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath it thou art laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In an endless shelter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hearest it forever sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the wind’s vague longings die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its branches dim and high⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hear’st the waters gliding by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slumberously welter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou wast full of love and truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of forgiveness and ruth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy great heart with hope and youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tided to o’erflowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst dwell in mysteries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there lingered on thine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadows of serener skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awfully wild memories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That were like foreknowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the earth thou would’st have gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighted from within alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeds from flowers in Heaven grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a free hand sowing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou didst remember well and long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fragments of thine angel-song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strive, through want of woe and wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To win the world unto it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sin it was to see and hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond To-day’s dim hemisphere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all mists of hope and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a life more true and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dearly thou didst rue it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light of the new world thou hadst won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erflooded by a purer sun⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly Fate’s ship came drifting on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the dark, save thou, not one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caught of the land a token.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou stood’st upon the farthest prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something within thy soul said “Now!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaping forth with eager brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou fell’st on shore heart-broken.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long time thy brethren stood in fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the breakers far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White with their anger, they could hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sounds of land, which thy quick ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caught long ago, they heard not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when at last they reached the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found thee lying on the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With some wild flowers in thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thy cold bosom stirred not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They listened, but they heard no sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save from the glad life all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A low, contented murmur.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long grass flowed adown the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hum rose from a hidden rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thy glad heart, that knew no ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But too much love, lay dead and still⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only thing that sent a chill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the heart of summer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou didst not seek the poet’s wreath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But too soon didst win it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without ’twas green, but underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were scorn and loneliness and death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gnawing the brain with burning teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And making mock within it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, who wast full of nobleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose very life-blood ’twas to bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose soul’s one law was giving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must bandy words with wickedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haggle with hunger and distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win that death which worldliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calls bitterly a living.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou sow’st no gold, and shalt not reap!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muttered earth, turning in her sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come home to the Eternal Deep!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmured a voice, and a wide sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wings through thy soul’s hush did creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of thy doom o’erflying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seem’d that thy strong heart would leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of thy breast, and thou didst weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not with fear of dying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men could not fathom thy deep fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could not understand thy tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoarded agony of years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bitter self-denying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So once, when high above the spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spirit sought its starry peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It came not back to face the jeers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of brothers who denied it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Star-crowned, thou dost possess the deeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of God, and thy white body sleeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the lone pine forever keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Patient watch beside it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Poet! underneath the turf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soft thou sleepest, free from morrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast struggled through the surf</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wild thoughts and want and sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, beneath the moaning pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full of rest, thy body lieth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While far up is clear sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath a sky divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her loosed wings thy spirit trieth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft she strove to spread them here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they were too white and clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our dingy atmosphere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy body findeth ample room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its still and grassy tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the silent river;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thy spirit found the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Narrow for the mighty birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which it dreamed of ever;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wast guilty of a rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned in a benigner clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of that more grievous crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ideal too sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the low-hung sky of Time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The calm spot where thy body lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladdens thy soul in Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is so still and holy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy body sleeps serenely there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well for it thy soul may care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was so beautiful and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lily white so wholly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From so pure and sweet a frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spirit parted as it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gentle as a maiden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now it lieth full of rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sods are lighter on its breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the great, prophetic guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith it was laden.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-shepherd-of-king-admetus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Shepherd of King Admetus</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There came a youth upon the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some thousand years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose slender hands were nothing worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether to plough, or reap, or sow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon an empty tortoise-shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stretched some chords, and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Music that made men’s bosoms swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearless, or brimmed their eyes with dew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then King Admetus, one who had</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pure taste by right divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed his singing not too bad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear between the cups of wine:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so, well pleased with being soothed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into a sweet half-sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times his kingly beard he smoothed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made him viceroy o’er his sheep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His words were simple words enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet he used them so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That what in other mouths was rough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his seemed musical and low.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men called him but a shiftless youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In whom no good they saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, unwittingly, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They made his careless words their law.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They knew not how he learned at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For idly, hour by hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat and watched the dead leaves fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or mused upon a common flower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It seemed the loveliness of things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did teach him all their use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, in mere weeds, and stones, and springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found a healing power profuse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men granted that his speech was wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when a glance they caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his slim grace and woman’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laughed, and called him good-for-naught.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet after he was dead and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And e’en his memory dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth seemed more sweet to live upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More full of love, because of him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And day by day more holy grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each spot where he had trod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till after-poets only knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their first-born brother as a god.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-token" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Token</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It is a mere wild rosebud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quite sallow now, and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet there’s something wondrous in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some gleams of days gone by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear sights and sounds that are to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very moons of memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stir my heart’s blood far below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its short-lived waves of joy and woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lips must fade and roses wither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All sweet times be o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They only smile, and, murmuring ‘Thither!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stay with us no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet ofttimes a look or smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgotten in a kiss’s while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years after from the dark will start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flash across the trembling heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou hast given me many roses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But never one, like this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erfloods both sense and spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such a deep, wild bliss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must have instincts that glean up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparse drops of this life in the cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose taste shall give us all that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can prove of immortality.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Earth’s stablest things are shadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in the life to come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply some chance-saved trifle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May tell of this old home:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now sometimes we seem to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a dark crevice of the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some relic, which, long pondered o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hints faintly at a life before.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-incident-in-a-railroad-car" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Incident in a Railroad Car</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He spoke of Burns: men rude and rough</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pressed round to hear the praise of one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose heart was made of manly, simple stuff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As homespun as their own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And, when he read, they forward leaned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drinking, with thirsty hearts and ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brook-like songs whom glory never weaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From humble smiles and tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Slowly there grew a tender awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sun-like, o’er faces brown and hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if in him who read they felt and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Some presence of the bard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">It was a sight for sin and wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And slavish tyranny to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sight to make our faith more pure and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In high humanity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I thought, these men will carry hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promptings their former life above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something of a finer reverence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For beauty, truth, and love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">God scatters love on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freely among his children all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always hearts are lying open wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Wherein some grains may fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There is no wind but soweth seeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a more true and open life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which burst, unlooked for, into high-souled deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With wayside beauty rife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">We find within these souls of ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some wild germs of a higher birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in the poet’s tropic heart bear flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whose fragrance fills the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Within the hearts of all men lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These promises of wider bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which blossom into hopes that cannot die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In sunny hours like this.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">All that hath been majestical</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In life or death, since time began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is native in the simple heart of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The angel heart of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And thus, among the untaught poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Great deeds and feelings find a home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cast in shadow all the golden lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of classic Greece and Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O mighty brother-soul of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er thou art, in low or high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy skyey arches with exulting span</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er-roof infinity!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">All thoughts that mould the age begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deep down within the primitive soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the many slowly upward win</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To one who grasps the whole:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In his wide brain the feeling deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That struggled on the many’s tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swells to a tide of thought, whose surges leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er the weak thrones of wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">All thought begins in feeling⁠—wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the great mass its base is hid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, narrowing up to thought, stands glorified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A moveless pyramid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Nor is he far astray, who deems</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That every hope, which rises and grows broad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the world’s heart, by ordered impulse streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the great heart of God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">God wills, man hopes: in common souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope is but vague and undefined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till from the poet’s tongue the message rolls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A blessing to his kind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Never did Poesy appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So full of heaven to me, as when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw how it would pierce through pride and fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the lives of coarsest men.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">It may be glorious to write</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thoughts that shall glad the two or three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High souls, like those far stars that come in sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Once in a century;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But better far it is to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One simple word, which now and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall waken their free nature in the weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And friendless sons of men;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">To write some earnest verse or line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, seeking not the praise of art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall make a clearer faith and manhood shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the untutored heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He who doth this, in verse or prose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May be forgotten in his day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But surely shall be crowned at last with those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who live and speak for aye.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rhoecus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rhoecus</h2>
			<p>
				<span>God sends his teachers unto every age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every clime, and every race of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With revelations fitted to their growth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shape of mind, nor gives the realm of Truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the selfish rule of one sole race:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore each form of worship that hath swayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life of man, and given it to grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master-key of knowledge, reverence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infolds some germs of goodness and of right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else never had the eager soul, which loathes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slothful down of pampered ignorance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found in it even a moment’s fitful rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There is an instinct in the human heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which makes that all the fables it hath coined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To justify the reign of its belief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strengthen it by beauty’s right divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veil in their inner cells a mystic gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, like the hazel twig, in faithful hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Points surely to the hidden springs of truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, as in nature naught is made in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all things have within their hull of use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wisdom and a meaning which may speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of spiritual secrets to the ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of spirit; so, in whatsoe’er the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath fashioned for a solace to itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make its inspirations suit its creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the niggard hands of falsehood wring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its needful food of truth, there ever is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sympathy with Nature, which reveals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not less than her own works, pure gleams of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earnest parables of inward lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear now this fairy legend of old Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As full of gracious youth, and beauty still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the immortal freshness of that grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved for all ages on some Attic frieze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A youth named Rhoecus, wandering in the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw an old oak just trembling to its fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, feeling pity of so fair a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He propped its gray trunk with admiring care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a thoughtless footstep loitered on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as he turned, he heard a voice behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That murmured ‘Rhoecus!’ ’Twas as if the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirred by a passing breath, had murmured it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, while he paused bewildered, yet again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It murmured ‘Rhoecus!’ softer than a breeze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He started and beheld with dizzy eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What seemed the substance of a happy dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand there before him, spreading a warm glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the green glooms of the shadowy oak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed a woman’s shape, yet far too fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be a woman, and with eyes too meek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For any that were wont to mate with gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All naked like a goddess stood she there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a goddess all too beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the guilt-born earthliness of shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Rhoecus, I am the Dryad of this tree,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus she began, dropping her low-toned words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serene, and full, and clear, as drops of dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘And with it I am doomed to live and die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rain and sunshine are my caterers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor have I other bliss than simple life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ask me what thou wilt, that I can give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a thankful joy it shall be thine.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then Rhoecus, with a flutter at the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet by the prompting of such beauty bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered: ‘What is there that can satisfy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The endless craving of the soul but love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me thy love, or but the hope of that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which must be evermore my nature’s goal.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a little pause she said again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with a glimpse of sadness in her tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I give it, Rhoecus, though a perilous gift;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hour before the sunset meet me here.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway there was nothing he could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the green glooms beneath the shadowy oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a sound came to his straining ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the low trickling rustle of the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far away upon an emerald slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The falter of an idle shepherd’s pipe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Now, in those days of simpleness and faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men did not think that happy things were dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they overstepped the narrow bourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of likelihood, but reverently deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing too wondrous or too beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the guerdon of a daring heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Rhoecus made no doubt that he was blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all along unto the city’s gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth seemed to spring beneath him as he walked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clear, broad sky looked bluer than its wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he could scarce believe he had not wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such sunshine seemed to glitter through his veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of blood, so light he felt and strange.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Young Rhoecus had a faithful heart enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one that in the present dwelt too much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, taking with blithe welcome whatsoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chance gave of joy, was wholly bound in that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the contented peasant of a vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deemed it the world, and never looked beyond.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, haply meeting in the afternoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some comrades who were playing at the dice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He joined them, and forgot all else beside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The dice were rattling at the merriest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rhoecus, who had met but sorry luck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just laughed in triumph at a happy throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When through the room there hummed a yellow bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That buzzed about his ear with down-dropped legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to light. And Rhoecus laughed and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling how red and flushed he was with loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘By Venus! does he take me for a rose?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brushed him off with rough, impatient hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still the bee came back, and thrice again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rhoecus did beat him off with growing wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then through the window flew the wounded bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rhoecus, tracking him with angry eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw a sharp mountain-peak of Thessaly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the red disk of the setting sun⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And instantly the blood sank from his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if its very walls had caved away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a word he turned, and, rushing forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran madly through the city and the gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the plain, which now the wood’s long shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the low sun thrown forward broad and dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened wellnigh unto the city’s wall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Quite spent and out of breath he reached the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, listening fearfully, he heard once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The low voice murmur ‘Rhoecus!’ close at hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat he looked around him, but could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naught but the deepening glooms beneath the oak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sighed the voice, ‘O Rhoecus! nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt thou behold me or by day or night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, who would fain have blessed thee with a love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More ripe and bounteous than ever yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled up with nectar any mortal heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou didst scorn my humble messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent’st him back to me with bruised wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We spirits only show to gentle eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We ever ask an undivided love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who scorns the least of Nature’s works</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is thenceforth exiled and shut out from all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell! for thou canst never see me more.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then Rhoecus beat his breast, and groaned aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cried, ‘Be pitiful! forgive me yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This once, and I shall never need it more!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Alas!’ the voice returned, ’tis thou art blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not I unmerciful; I can forgive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But have no skill to heal thy spirit’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the soul hath power o’er itself.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that again there murmured ‘Nevermore!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rhoecus after heard no other sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the rattling of the oak’s crisp leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the long surf upon a distant shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raking the sea-worn pebbles up and down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night had gathered round him: o’er the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city sparkled with its thousand lights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sounds of revel fell upon his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harshly and like a curse; above, the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its bright sublimity of stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deepened, and on his forehead smote the breeze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty was all around him and delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from that eve he was alone on earth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-sadness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In Sadness</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There is not in this life of ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One bliss unmixed with fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hope that wakes our deepest powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A face of sadness wears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dew that showers our dearest flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the bitter dew of tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fame waiteth long, and lingereth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through weary nights and morns⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evermore the shadow Death</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mocking finger scorns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That underneath the laurel wreath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should be a wreath of thorns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The laurel leaves are cool and green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the thorns are hot and sharp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lean Hunger grins and stares between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The poet and his harp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though of Love’s sunny sheen his woof have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grim want thrusts in the warp.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And if beyond this darksome clime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some fair star Hope may see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That keeps unjarred the blissful chime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of its golden infancy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the harvest-time of faith sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not always is to be⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet would the true soul rather choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its home where sorrow is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in a sated peace to lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its life’s supremest bliss⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rainbow hues that bend profuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er cloudy spheres like this⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The want, the sorrow and the pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That are Love’s right to cure⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunshine bursting after rain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gladness insecure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes us fain strong hearts to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do and to endure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High natures must be thunder-scarred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many a searing wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mother Sorrow’s breasts the bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sucks gifts of deepest song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor all unmarred with struggles hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wax the Soul’s sinews strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dear Patience, too, is born of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Patience that opes the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherethrough the soul of man must go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to each nobler state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose voice’s flow so meek and low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smooths the bent brows of Fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though Fame be slow, yet Death is swift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, o’er the spirit’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life after life doth change and shift</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With larger destinies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on we drift, some wider rift</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shows us serener skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And though naught falleth to us here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But gains the world counts loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though all we hope of wisdom clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When climbed to seems but dross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet all, though ne’er Christ’s faith they wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least may share his cross.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-requiem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Requiem</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ay, pale and silent maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cold as thou liest there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine was the sunniest nature</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ever drew the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wildest and most wayward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet so gently kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seemedst but to body</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A breath of summer wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Into the eternal shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That girds our life around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the infinite silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith Death’s shore is bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast gone forth, beloved!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I were mean to weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast left Life’s shallows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dost possess the Deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou liest low and silent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy heart is cold and still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine eyes are shut forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Death hath had his will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved and would have taken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I loved and would have kept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We strove⁠—and he was stronger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I have never wept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let him possess thy body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy soul is still with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More sunny and more gladsome</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than it was wont to be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy body was a fetter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bound me to the flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thank God that it is broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now I live afresh!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now I can see thee clearly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dusky cloud of clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hid thy starry spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is rent and blown away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth I give thy body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy spirit to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw its bright wings growing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew that thou must fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now I can love thee truly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For nothing comes between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The senses and the spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The seen and the unseen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts the eternal shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silence bursts apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the soul’s boundless future</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is present in my heart.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-fatherland" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fatherland</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Where is the true man’s fatherland?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is it where he by chance is born?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doth not the yearning spirit scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such scant borders to be spanned?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh yes! his fatherland must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the blue heaven wide and free!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it alone where freedom is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where God is God and man is man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doth he not claim a broader span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the soul’s love of home than this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh yes! his fatherland must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the blue heaven wide and free!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where’er a human heart doth wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Joy’s myrtle-wreath or sorrow’s gyves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er a human spirit strives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a life more true and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is the true man’s birthplace grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His is a world-wide fatherland!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where’er a single slave doth pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er one man may help another⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thank God for such a birthright, brother⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spot of earth is thine and mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is the true man’s birthplace grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His is a world-wide fatherland!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-parable-worn-and-footsore-was-the-prophet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Parable</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Worn and Footsore Was the Prophet</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Worn and footsore was the Prophet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he gained the holy hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘God has left the earth,’ he murmured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Here his presence lingers still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘God of all the olden prophets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wilt thou speak with men no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I not as truly served thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thy chosen ones of yore?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Hear me, guider of my fathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! a humble heart is mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy mercy I beseech thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grant thy servant but a sign!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bowing then his head, he listened</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For an answer to his prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No loud burst of thunder followed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not a murmur stirred the air:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the tuft of moss before him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opened while he waited yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, from out the rock’s hard bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprang a tender violet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘God! I thank thee,’ said the Prophet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Hard of heart and blind was I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking to the holy mountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the gift of prophecy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Still thou speakest with thy children</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freely as in eld sublime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humbleness, and love, and patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still give empire over time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Had I trusted in my nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had faith in lowly things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou thyself wouldst then have sought me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And set free my spirit’s wings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘But I looked for signs and wonders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That o’er men should give me sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirsting to be more than mortal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I was even less than clay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Ere I entered on my journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I girt my loins to start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran to me my little daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beloved of my heart;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘In her hand she held a flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like to this as like may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, beside my very threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had plucked and brought to me.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="forgetfulness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Forgetfulness</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There’s a haven of sure rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the loud world’s bewildering stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a bird dreaming on her nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As dew hid in a rose’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Hesper in the glowing West;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">So the heart sleeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In thy calm deeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Serene Forgetfulness!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No sorrow in that place may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The noise of life grows less and less:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As moss far down within the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, in white lily caves, a bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As life in a hazy reverie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So the heart’s wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In thy dim cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hushes, Forgetfulness!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Duty and care fade far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What toil may be we cannot guess:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a ship anchored in the bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a cloud at summer-noon astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As water-blooms in a breezeless day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So,’neath thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The full heart lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dreams, Forgetfulness!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-reverie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Reverie</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In the twilight deep and silent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes thy spirit unto mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the moonlight and the starlight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over cliff and woodland shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the quiver of the river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems a thrill of joy benign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then I rise and wander slowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the headland by the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the evening star throbs setting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the cloudy cedar tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from under, mellow thunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the surf comes fitfully.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then within my soul I feel thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a gleam of other years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visions of my childhood murmur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their old madness in my ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the pleasance of thy presence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cools my heart with blissful tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the wondrous dreams of boyhood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All youth’s fiery thirst of praise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the surer hopes of manhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blossoming in sadder days⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joys that bound me, griefs that crowned me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a better wreath than bays⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the longings after freedom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vague love of human kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering far and near at random</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a winged seed in the wind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dim yearnings and fierce burnings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an undirected mind⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All of these, oh best belovèd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happiest present dreams and past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy love find safe fulfilment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ripened into truths at last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faith and beauty, hope and duty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one centre gather fast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How my nature, like an ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the breath of thine awakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaps its shores in mad exulting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in foamy thunder breaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then downsinking, lieth shrinking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the tumult that it makes!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blazing Hesperus hath sunken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low within the pale-blue west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with golden splendor crowneth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horizon’s piny crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughtful quiet stills the riot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wild longing in my breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Home I loiter through the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the quivering trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, as if a spirit stirred them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sway and bend, till by degrees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The far surge’s murmur merges</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rustle of the breeze.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love</h2>
			<p>
				<span>True Love is but a humble, low-born thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hath its food served up in earthen ware;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a thing to walk with, hand in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the everydayness of this workday world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baring its tender feet to every flint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet letting not one heart-beat go astray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Beauty’s law of plainness and content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A simple, fireside thing, whose quiet smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can warm earth’s poorest hovel to a home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, when our autumn cometh, as it must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And life in the chill wind shivers bare and leafless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall still be blest with Indian-summer youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bleak November, and, with thankful heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smile on its ample stores of garnered fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As full of sunshine to our aged eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when it nursed the blossoms of our spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is true Love, which steals into the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With feet as silent as the lightsome dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That kisses smooth the rough brows of the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hath its will through blissful gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not like a rocket, which, with passionate glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirs suddenly up, then bursts, and leaves the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painfully quivering on the dazèd eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love that gives and takes, that seeth faults,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with flaw-seeking eyes like needle points,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But loving-kindly ever looks them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the o’ercoming faith that still forgives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love that shall be new and fresh each hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is the sunset’s golden mystery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the sweet coming of the evening-star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alike, and yet most unlike, every day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeming ever best and fairest <i>now</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love that doth not kneel for what it seeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But faces Truth and Beauty as their peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showing its worthiness of noble thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a clear sense of inward nobleness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love that in its object findeth not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All grace and beauty, and enough to sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its thirst of blessing, but, in all of good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found there, sees but the Heaven-implanted types</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of good and beauty in the soul of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traces, in the simplest heart that beats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A family-likeness to its chosen one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That claims of it the rights of brotherhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love is blind but with the fleshly eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so its inner sight may be more clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And outward shows of beauty only so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are needful at the first, as is a hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide and to uphold an infant’s steps:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine natures need them not: their earnest look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierces the body’s mask of thin disguise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beauty ever is to them revealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the unshapeliest, meanest lump of clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arms outstretched and eager face ablaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yearning to be but understood and loved.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-perdita-singing" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Perdita, Singing</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thy voice is like a fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaping up in clear moonshine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver, silver, ever mounting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ever sinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Without thinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that brimful heart of thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every sad and happy feeling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast had in bygone years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through thy lips comes stealing, stealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Clear and low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy smiles and all thy tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In thy voice awaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sweetness, wove of joy and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From their teaching it hath taken:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling and music move together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a swan and shadow ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating on a sky-blue river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a day of cloudless weather.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It hath caught a touch of sadness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Yet it is not sad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hath tones of clearest gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Yet it is not glad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dim, sweet twilight voice it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where to-day’s accustomed blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is over-grayed with memories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With starry feelings quivered through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thy voice is like a fountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaping up in sunshine bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I never weary counting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its clear droppings, lone and single,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when in one full gush they mingle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shooting in melodious light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thine is music such as yields</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feelings of old brooks and fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, around this pent-up room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sheds a woodland, free perfume;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oh, thus forever sing to me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Oh, thus forever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green, bright grass of childhood bring to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flowing like an emerald river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the bright blue skies above!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh, sing them back, as fresh as ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the bosom of my love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sunshine and the merriment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unsought, evergreen content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of that never cold time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The joy, that, like a clear breeze, went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Through and through the old time!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peace sits within thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With white hands crossed in joyful rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, through thy lips and face, arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The melodies from out thy breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">She sits and sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With folded wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And white arms crost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Weep not for bygone things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">They are not lost:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beauty which the summer time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er thine opening spirit shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest oracles sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That filled thy soul with joyous dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scent of every smallest flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made thy heart sweet for an hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, every holy influence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing to thee, thou knewest not whence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine eyes to-day is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh as it hath ever been;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promptings of Nature, beckonings sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever led thy childish feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still will linger unawares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guiders of thy silver hairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every look and every word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou givest forth to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell of the singing of the bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose music stilled thy boyish play.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy voice is like a fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twinkling up in sharp starlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the moon behind the mountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dims the low East with faintest white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ever darkling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ever sparkling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">We know not if ’tis dark or bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when the great moon hath rolled round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, sudden-slow, its solemn power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows from behind its black, clear-edgèd bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No spot of dark the fountain keepeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, swift as opening eyelids, leapeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a waving silver flower.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-in-the-old-days-of-awe-and-keen-eyed-wonder" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Ode</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">In the Old Days of Awe and Keen-Eyed Wonder</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the old days of awe and keen-eyed wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Poet’s song with blood-warm truth was rife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw the mysteries which circle under</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The outward shell and skin of daily life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing to him were fleeting time and fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His soul was led by the eternal law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was in him no hope of fame, no passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with calm, godlike eyes he only saw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did not sigh o’er heroes dead and buried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chief-mourner at the Golden Age’s hearse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor deem that souls whom Charon grim had ferried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone were fitting themes of epic verse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could believe the promise of to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feel the wondrous meaning of to-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had a deeper faith in holy sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the world’s seeming loss could take away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know the heart of all things was his duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things did sing to him to make him wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with a sorrowful and conquering beauty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soul of all looked grandly from his eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gazed on all within him and without him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He watched the flowing of Time’s steady tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shapes of glory floated all about him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whispered to him, and he prophesied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than all men he more fearless was and freer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his brethren cried with one accord⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Behold the holy man! Behold the Seer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him who hath spoken with the unseen Lord!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to his heart with large embrace had taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The universal sorrow of mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, from that root, a shelter never shaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tree of wisdom grew with sturdy rind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could interpret well the wondrous voices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to the calm and silent spirit come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew that the One Soul no more rejoices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the star’s anthem than the insect’s hum.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in his heart was ever meek and humble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet with kingly pomp his numbers ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he foresaw how all things false should crumble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the free, uplifted soul of man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when he was made full to overflowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the loveliness of heaven and earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out rushed his song, like molten iron glowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show God sitting by the humblest hearth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With calmest courage he was ever ready</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach that action was the truth of thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with strong arm and purpose firm and steady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An anchor for the drifting world he wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did he make the meanest man partaker</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all his brother-gods unto him gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All souls did reverence him and name him Maker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he died heaped temples on his grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still his deathless words of light are swimming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serene throughout the great deep infinite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human soul, unwaning and undimming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cheer and guide the mariner at night.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now the Poet is an empty rhymer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lies with idle elbow on the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fits his singing, like a cunning timer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all men’s prides and fancies as they pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not his the song, which, in its metre holy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chimes with the music of the eternal stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humbling the tyrant, lifting up the lowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sending sun through the soul’s prison-bars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maker no more⁠—oh no! unmaker rather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he unmakes who doth not all put forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power given freely by our loving Father</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show the body’s dross, the spirit’s worth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awake! great spirit of the ages olden!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shiver the mists that hide thy starry lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let man’s soul be yet again beholden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee for wings to soar to her desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, prophesy no more to-morrow’s splendor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be no more shamefaced to speak out for Truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay on her altar all the gushings tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hope, the fire, the loving faith of youth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, prophesy no more the Maker’s coming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say not his onward footsteps thou canst hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dim void, like to the awful humming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the great wings of some new-lighted sphere!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, prophesy no more, but be the Poet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This longing was but granted unto thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when all beauty thou couldst feel and know it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That beauty in its highest thou shouldst be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou who moanest tost with sealike longings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dimly hearest voices call on thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose soul is overfilled with mighty throngings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love, and fear, and glorious agony.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou of the toil-strung hands and iron sinews</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soul by Mother Earth with freedom fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom the hero-spirit yet continues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The old free nature is not chained or dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arouse! let thy soul break in music-thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let loose the ocean that is in thee pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour forth thy hope, thy fear, thy love, thy wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the age what all its signs have meant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er thy wildered crowd of brethren jostles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where’er there lingers but a shadow of wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There still is need of martyrs and apostles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There still are texts for never-dying song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From age to age man’s still aspiring spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finds wider scope and sees with clearer eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou in larger measure dost inherit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What made thy great forerunners free and wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit thou enthronèd where the Poet’s mountain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the thunder lifts its silent peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roll thy songs down like a gathering fountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all may drink and find the rest they seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sing! there shall silence grow in earth and heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A silence of deep awe and wondering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, listening gladly, bend the angels, even,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear a mortal like an angel sing.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Among the toil-worn poor my soul is seeking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who shall bring the Maker’s name to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be the voice of that almighty speaking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which every age demands to do it right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proprieties our silken bards environ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who would be the tongue of this wide land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must string his harp with chords of sturdy iron</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strike it with a toil-imbrownèd hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One who hath dwelt with Nature well attended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hath learnt wisdom from her mystic books,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose soul with all her countless lives hath blended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that all beauty awes us in his looks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who not with body’s waste his soul hath pampered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who as the clear northwestern wind is free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who walks with Form’s observances unhampered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follows the One Will obediently;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose eyes, like windows on a breezy summit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Control a lovely prospect every way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who doth not sound God’s sea with earthly plummet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find a bottom still of worthless clay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who heeds not how the lower gusts are working,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing that one sure wind blows on above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sees, beneath the foulest faces lurking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One God-built shrine of reverence and love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sees all stars that wheel their shining marches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around the centre fixed of Destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the encircling soul serene o’erarches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moving globe of being like a sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who feels that God and Heaven’s great deeps are nearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to whose heart his fellow-man is nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who doth not hold his soul’s own freedom dearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than that of all his brethren, low or high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to the Right can feel himself the truer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For being gently patient with the wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sees a brother in the evildoer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And finds in Love the heart’s-blood of his song;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, this is he for whom the world is waiting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing the beatings of its mighty heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too long hath it been patient with the grating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of scrannel-pipes, and heard it misnamed Art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him the smiling soul of man shall listen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laying awhile its crown of thorns aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once again in every eye shall glisten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of a nature satisfied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His verse shall have a great commanding motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaving and swelling with a melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learnt of the sky, the river, and the ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the pure, majestic things that be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awake, then, thou! we pine for thy great presence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make us feel the soul once more sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are of far too infinite an essence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest contented with the lies of Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak out! and lo! a hush of deepest wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall sink o’er all this many-voicèd scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a sudden burst of rattling thunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shatters the blueness of a sky serene.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-moon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Moon</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">My soul was like the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the moon was made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moaning in vague immensity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of its own strength afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unresful and unstaid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through every rift it foamed in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About its earthly prison,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking some unknown thing in pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sinking restless back again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For yet no moon had risen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its only voice a vast dumb moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of utterless anguish speaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lay unhopefully alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lived but in an aimless seeking.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So was my soul; but when ’twas full</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of unrest to o’erloading,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice of something beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whispered a dim foreboding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet so soft, so sweet, so low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It had not more of joy than woe;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as the sea doth oft lie still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making its waters meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if by an unconscious will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the moon’s silver feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So lay my soul within mine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou, its guardian moon, didst rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, howe’er its waves above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May toss and seem uneaseful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One strong, eternal law of Love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With guidance sure and peaceful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As calm and natural as breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves its great deeps through life and death.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-glance-behind-the-curtain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Glance Behind the Curtain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>We see but half the causes of our deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking them wholly in the outer life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heedless of the encircling spirit-world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, though unseen, is felt, and sows in us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All germs of pure and world-wide purposes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From one stage of our being to the next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We pass unconscious o’er a slender bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The momentary work of unseen hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which crumbles down behind us; looking back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We see the other shore, the gulf between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, marvelling how we won to where we stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content ourselves to call the builder Chance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We trace the wisdom to the apple’s fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to the birth-throes of a mighty Truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, for long ages in blank Chaos dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet yearned to be incarnate, and had found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last a spirit meet to be the womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which it might be born to bless mankind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to the soul of Newton, ripe with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoarded thoughtfulness of earnest years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waiting but one ray of sunlight more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blossom fully.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">But whence came that ray?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We call our sorrows Destiny, but ought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather to name our high successes so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the instincts of great souls are Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have predestined sway: all other things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except by leave of us, could never be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Destiny is but the breath of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still moving in us, the last fragment left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our unfallen nature, waking oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within our thought, to beckon us beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The narrow circle of the seen and known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always tending to a noble end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As all things must that overrule the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for a space unseat the helmsman, Will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fate of England and of freedom once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed wavering in the heart of one plain man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One step of his, and the great dial-hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That marks the destined progress of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the eternal round from wisdom on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To higher wisdom, had been made to pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred years. That step he did not take⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not why, nor we, but only God⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lived to make his simple oaken chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More terrible and soberly august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More full of majesty than any throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before or after, of a British king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Upon the pier stood two stern-visaged men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking to where a little craft lay moored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swayed by the lazy current of the Thames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which weltered by in muddy listlessness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grave men they were, and battlings of fierce thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had trampled out all softness from their brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ploughed rough furrows there before their time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For other crop than such as home-bred Peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sows broadcast in the willing soil of Youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Care, not of self, but for the common-weal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had robbed their eyes of youth, and left instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A look of patient power and iron will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something fiercer, too, that gave broad hint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the plain weapons girded at their sides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The younger had an aspect of command⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not such as trickles down, a slender stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the shrunk channel of a great descent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But such as lies entowered in heart and head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an arm prompt to do the ‘hests of both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His was a brow where gold were out of place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet it seemed right worthy of a crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Though he despised such), were it only made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of iron, or some serviceable stuff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would have matched his brownly rugged face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elder, although such he hardly seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Care makes so little of some five short years),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had a clear, honest face, whose rough-hewn strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was mildened by the scholar’s wiser heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sober courage, such as best befits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unsullied temper of a well-taught mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet so remained that one could plainly guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hushed volcano smouldering underneath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke: the other, hearing, kept his gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still fixed, as on some problem in the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘O Cromwell we are fallen on evil times!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a day when England had a wide room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For honest men as well as foolish kings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the uneasy stomach of the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns squeamish at them both. Therefore let us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek out that savage clime, where men as yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are free: there sleeps the vessel on the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her languid canvas drooping for the wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give us but that, and what need we to fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Order of the Council? The free waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not say No to please a wayward king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will the winds turn traitors at his beck:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things are fitly cared for, and the Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will watch us kindly o’er the exodus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of us his servants now, as in old time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have no cloud or fire, and haply we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not pass dry-shod through the ocean-stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, saved or lost, all things are in His hand.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake he, and meantime the other stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wide gray eyes still reading the blank air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if upon the sky’s blue wall he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some mystic sentence, written by a hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as of old made pale the Assyrian king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girt with his satraps in the blazing feast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Hampden! a moment since, my purpose was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fly with thee⁠—for I will call it flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor flatter it with any smoother name⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But something in me bids me not to go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am one, thou knowest, who, unmoved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By what the weak deem omens, yet give heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reverence due to whatsoe’er my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispers of warning to the inner ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moreover, as I know that God brings round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His purposes in ways undreamed by us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes the wicked but his instruments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hasten their own swift and sudden fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see the beauty of his providence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the King’s order: blind, he will not let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His doom part from him, but must bid it stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ‘t were a cricket, whose enlivening chirp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved to hear beneath his very hearth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should we fly? Nay, why not rather stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rear again our Zion’s crumbled walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not, as of old the walls of Thebes were built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By minstrel twanging, but, if need should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the more potent music of our swords?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think’st thou that score of men beyond the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claim more God’s care than all of England here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No; when He moves his arm, it is to aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whole peoples, heedless if a few be crushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some are ever, when the destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man takes one stride onward nearer home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe me, ’tis the mass of men He loves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, where there is most sorrow and most want,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the high heart of man is trodden down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most, ’tis not because He hides his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From them in wrath, as purblind teachers prate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so: there most is He, for there is He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most needed. Men who seek for Fate abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not so near his heart as they who dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frankly to face her where she faces them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their own threshold, where their souls are strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grapple with and throw her; as I once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being yet a boy, did cast this puny king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who now has grown so dotard as to deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he can wrestle with an angry realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And throw the brawned Antæus of men’s rights.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, Hampden! they have half-way conquered Fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who go half-way to meet her⁠—as will I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom hath yet a work for me to do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So speaks that inward voice which never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake falsely, when it urged the spirit on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To noble emprise for country and mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for success, I ask no more than this⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear unflinching witness to the truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All true whole men succeed; for what is worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Success’s name, unless it be the thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inward surety, to have carried out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble purpose to a noble end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although it be the gallows or the block?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis only Falsehood that doth ever need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These outward shows of gain to bolster her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be it we prove the weaker with our swords;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth only needs to be for once spoke out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there’s such music in her, such strange rhythm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As makes men’s memories her joyous slaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clings around the soul, as the sky clings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the mute earth, forever beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if o’erclouded, only to burst forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More all-embracingly divine and clear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Get but the truth once uttered, and ’tis like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A star new-born, that drops into its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which, once circling in its placid round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all the tumult of the earth can shake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘What should we do in that small colony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pinched fanatics, who would rather choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom to clip an inch more from their hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the great chance of setting England free?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not there, amid the stormy wilderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we learn wisdom; or if learned, what room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put it into act⁠—else worse than naught?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We learn our souls more, tossing for an hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon this huge and ever-vexed sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human thought, where kingdoms go to wreck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like fragile bubbles yonder in the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in a cycle of New England sloth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke only by a petty Indian war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or quarrel for a letter more or less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some hard word, which, spelt in either way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not their most learned clerks can understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New times demand new measures and new men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world advances, and in time outgrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laws that in our fathers’ day were best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, doubtless, after us, some purer scheme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be shaped out by wiser men than we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made wiser by the steady growth of truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot hale Utopia on by force;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But better, almost, be at work in sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in a brute inaction browse and sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man is born into the world whose work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not born with him; there is always work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tools to work withal, for those who will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blessed are the horny hands of toil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The busy world stoves angrily aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man who stands with arms akimbo set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until occasion tells him what to do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who waits to have his task marked out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall die and leave his errand unfulfilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our time is one that calls for earnest deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Season and Government, like two broad seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yearn for each other with outstretched arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across this narrow isthmus of the throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roll their white surf higher every day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One age moves onward, and the next builds up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cities and gorgeous palaces, where stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rude log-huts of those who tamed the wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rearing from out the forests they had felled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goodly framework of a fairer state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The builder’s trowel and the settler’s axe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are seldom wielded by the selfsame hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ours is the harder task, yet not the less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we receive the blessing for our toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the choice spirits of the aftertime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul is not a palace of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where outworn creeds, like Rome’s gray senate, quake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing afar the Vandal’s trumpet hoarse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shakes old systems with a thunder-fit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That time is ripe, and rotten-ripe, for change;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let it come: I have no dread of what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is called for by the instinct of mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor think I that God’s world will fall apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because we tear a parchment more or less.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth Is eternal, but her effluence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With endless change, is fitted to the hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mirror is turned forward to reflect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The promise of the future, not the past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who would win the name of truly great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must understand his own age and the next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make the present ready to fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its prophecy, and with the future merge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently and peacefully, as wave with wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The future works out great men’s purposes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present is enough, for common souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, never looking forward, are indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere clay, wherein the footprints of their age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are petrified forever; better those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lead the blind old giant by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the pathless desert where he gropes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set him onward in his darksome way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not fear to follow out the truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit along the precipice’s edge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us speak plain: there is more force in names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than most men dream of; and a lie may keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its throne a whole age longer, if it skulk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the shield of some fair-seeming name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us call tyrants <i>tyrants</i>, and maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That only freedom comes by grace of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that comes not by his grace must fail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For men in earnest have no time to waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In patching fig-leaves for the naked truth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘I will have one more grapple with the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charles Stuart: whom the boy o’ercame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man stands not in awe of. I, perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am one raised up by the Almighty arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To witness some great truth to all the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls destined to o’erleap the vulgar lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mould the world unto the scheme of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have a fore-consciousness of their high doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men are known to shiver at the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the cold shadow of some coming ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creeps slowly o’er their spirits unawares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath Good less power of prophecy than Ill?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How else could men whom God hath called to sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s rudder, and to steer the bark of Truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beating against the tempest tow’rd her port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear all the mean and buzzing grievances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The petty martyrdoms, wherewith Sin strives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To weary out the tethered hope of Faith?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sneers, the unrecognizing look of friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who worship the dead corpse of old king Custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it doth lie In state within the Church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striving to cover up the mighty ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a man’s palm, and making even the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie for them, holding up the glass reversed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the hope of man seem farther off?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My God! when I read o’er the bitter lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men whose eager heart’s were quite too great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beat beneath the cramped mode of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see them mocked at by the world they love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haggling with prejudice for pennyworths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that reform which their hard toil will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The common birthright of the age to come⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I see this, spite of my faith in God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I marvel how their hearts bear up so long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could they but for this same prophecy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This inward feeling of the glorious end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Deem me not fond; but in my warmer youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere my heart’s bloom was soiled and brushed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had great dreams of mighty things to come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of conquest, whether by the sword or pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew not; but some Conquest I would have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else swift death: now wiser grown in years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find youth’s dreams are but the flutterings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those strong wings whereon the soul shall soar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In after time to win a starry throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so I cherish them, for they were lots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I, a boy, cast in the helm of Fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now will I draw them, since a man’s right hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A right hand guided by an earnest soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a true instinct, takes the golden prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out a thousand blanks. What men call luck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the prerogative of valiant souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fealty life pays its rightful kings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helm is shaking now, and I will stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pluck my lot forth; it were sin to flee!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So they two turned together; one to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fighting for freedom on the bloody field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other, far more happy, to become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A name earth wears forever next her heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the few that have a right to rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the true Makers: for his spirit wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Order from Chaos; proved that right divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt only in the excellence of truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far within old Darkness’ hostile lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced and pitched the shining tents of Light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall the grateful Muse forget to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That⁠—not the least among his many claims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deathless honor⁠—he was Milton’s friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man not second among those who lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show us that the poet’s lyre demands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arm of tougher sinew than the sword.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-forlorn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Forlorn</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The night is dark, the stinging sleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swept by the bitter gusts of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives whistling down the lonely street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And glazes on the pavement bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The street-lamps flare and struggle dim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the gray sleet-clouds as they pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, governed by a boisterous whim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drop down and rustle on the glass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One poor, heart-broken, outcast girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faces the east-wind’s searching flaws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as about her heart they whirl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her tattered cloak more tightly draws.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The flat brick walls look cold and bleak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her bare feet to the sidewalk freeze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet dares she not a shelter seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though faint with hunger and disease.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sharp storm cuts her forehead bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, piercing through her garments thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beats on her shrunken breast, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes colder the cold heart within.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She lingers where a ruddy glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Streams outward through an open shutter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adding more bitterness to woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More loneliness to desertion utter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One half the cold she had not felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until she saw this gush of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread warmly forth, and seem to melt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its slow way through the deadening night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She hears a woman’s voice within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singing sweet words her childhood knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And years of misery and sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furl off, and leave her heaven blue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her freezing heart, like one who sinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outwearied in the drifting snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowses to deadly sleep and thinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer of its hopeless woe;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old fields, and clear blue summer days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old meadows, green with grass, and trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shimmer through the trembling haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whiten in the western breeze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old faces, all the friendly past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rises within her heart again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sunshine from her childhood cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes summer of the icy rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Enhaloed by a mild, warm glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From man’s humanity apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hears old footsteps wandering slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the lone chambers of the heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Outside the porch before the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her cheek upon the cold, hard stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lies, no longer foul and poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer dreary and alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next morning something heavily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the opening door did weigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, from sin and sorrow free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman on the threshold lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A smile upon the wan lips told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she had found a calm release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that, from out the want and cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The song had borne her soul in peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For, whom the heart of man shuts out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes the heart of God takes in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fences them all round about</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With silence mid the world’s loud din;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And one of his great charities</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Music, and it doth not scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To close the lids upon the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the polluted and forlorn;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Far was she from her childhood’s home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Farther in guilt had wandered thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thither it had bid her come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To die in maiden innocence.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-o-moonlight-deep-and-tender" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">O Moonlight Deep and Tender</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O moonlight deep and tender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A year and more agone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your mist of golden splendor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round my betrothal shone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O elm-leaves dark and dewy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The very same ye seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The low wind trembles through ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye murmur in my dream!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O river, dim with distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flow thus forever by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part of my existence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within your heart doth lie!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O stars, ye saw our meeting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two beings and one soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two hearts so madly beating</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mingle and be whole!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O happy night, deliver</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her kisses back to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or keep them all, and give her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A blisslul dream of me!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="midnight" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Midnight</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The moon shines white and silent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the mist, which, like a tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some enchanted ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er the wide marsh doth glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreading its ghost-like billows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silently far and wide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A vague and starry magic</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes all things mysteries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lures the earth’s dumb spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to the longing skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seem to hear dim whispers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tremulous replies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fireflies o’er the meadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In pulses come and go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elm-trees’ heavy shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weighs on the grass below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faintly from the distance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dreaming cock doth crow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All things look strange and mystic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The very bushes swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take wild shapes and motions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if beneath a spell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seem not the same lilacs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From childhood known so well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The snow of deepest silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er everything doth fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So beautiful and quiet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet so like a pall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if all life were ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rest were come to all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O wild and wondrous midnight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is a might in thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the charmèd body</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almost like spirit be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give it some faint glimpses</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of immortality!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Prayer</h2>
			<p>
				<span>God! do not let my loved one die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But rather wait until the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am grown in purity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough to enter thy pure clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then take me, I will gladly go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that my love remain below!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, let her stay! She is by birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What I through death must learn to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We need her more on our poor earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than thou canst need in heaven with thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hath her wings already, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must burst this earth-shell ere I fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, God, take me! We shall be near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More near than ever, each to each:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her angel ears will find more clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heavenly than my earthly speech;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still, as I draw nigh to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her soul and mine shall closer be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fantasy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fantasy</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Round and round me she waved swinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Like a wreath of smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a clear, low gurgle singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What may ne’er be spoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her white arms floated on the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Like swans upon a stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So stately fair, beyond compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their gracefulness did seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I knew, by the splendor of her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That all must be a dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For round her limbs it went and came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Hither and thither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">I knew not whither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fitfully like a wind-waved flame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bright and golden as flame was never⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And it flowed back and forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Like the lights of the north,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round her and round her forever and ever!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">She filled the cup of melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With madness to the brim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wild, wild songs she sang to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That made my brain grow dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like those that throng the traveller’s mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When night drops down before and behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he can hear naught but the lonely wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the bleak pines over him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">How may I tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The sea-like swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of ever-growing melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">That drifted her words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Like white sea-birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Swinging and heaving on to me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Her song came like a sudden breeze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">It wound through my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With a flashing dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a bird winds through the trees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’T was like a brook flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’T was like a wind blowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’T was like a star and like a river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’T was like all things that weary never⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It rhymed with the grass and the open sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">With a billowy roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">It flooded my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thrilled it with fearful ecstasy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was calm as music e’er can be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But an inward might was in its motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A consciousness of majesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the heart of the unruffled ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, clear and still, by breeze unshent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">With a world-wide throe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Heaves to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From continent to continent.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1842.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-heritage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Heritage</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The rich man’s son inherits lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And piles of brick and stone, and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he inherits soft white hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tender flesh that fears the cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor dares to wear a garment old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One scarce would wish to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rich man’s son inherits cares;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bank may break, the factory burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A breath may burst his bubble shares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And soft white hands could hardly earn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A living that would serve his turn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One scarce would wish to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rich man’s son inherits wants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His stomach craves for dainty fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sated heart, he hears the pants</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of toiling hinds with brown arms bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wearies in his easy-chair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One scarce would wish to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What doth the poor man’s son inherit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stout muscles and a sinewy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hardy frame, a hardier spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King of two hands, he does his part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every useful toil and art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A king might wish to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What doth the poor man’s son inherit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wishes o’erjoyed with humble things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rank adjudged by toil-won merit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Content that from employment springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heart that in his labor sings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A king might wish to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What doth the poor man’s son inherit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A patience learned of being poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courage, if sorrow come, to bear it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fellow-feeling that is sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make the outcast bless his door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A king might wish to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O rich man’s son! there is a toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with all others level stands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large charity doth never soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But only whiten, soft white hands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is the best crop from thy lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth being rich to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O poor man’s son! scorn not thy state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is worse weariness than thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In merely being rich and great;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Toil only gives the soul to shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make rest fragrant and benign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth being poor to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Both, heirs to some six feet of sod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are equal in the earth at last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both, children of the same dear God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prove title to your heirship vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By record of a well-filled past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well worth a life to hold in fee.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-rose-a-ballad" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Rose: A Ballad</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In his tower sat the poet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazing on the roaring sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Take this rose,’ he sighed, ‘and throw it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where there’s none that loveth me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the rock the billow bursteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sinks back into the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in vain my spirit thirsteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So to burst and be at ease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take, O sea! the tender blossom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath lain against my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thy black and angry bosom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It will find a surer rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life is vain, and love is hollow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ugly death stands there behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hate and scorn and hunger follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him that toileth for his kind.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth into the night he hurled it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with bitter smile did mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the surly tempest whirled it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift into the hungry dark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foam and spray drive back to leeward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the gale, with dreary moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drifts the helpless blossom seaward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the breakers all alone.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Stands a maiden, on the morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Musing by the wave-beat strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half in hope and half in sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tracing words upon the sand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Shall I ever then behold him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hath been my life so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever to this sick heart told him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be the spirit of his song?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch not, sea, the blessed letters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have traced upon thy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare his name whose spirit fetters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine with love forevermore!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swells the tide and overflows it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, with omen pure and meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brings a little rose, and throws it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Humbly at the maiden’s feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of bliss she takes the token,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, upon her snowy breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soothes the ruffled petals broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the ocean’s fierce unrest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Love is thine, O heart! and surely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace shall also be thine own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the heart that trusteth purely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never long can pine alone.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In his tower sits the poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blisses new and strange to him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill his heart and overflow it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a wonder sweet and dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up the beach the ocean slideth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a whisper of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the moon in silence glideth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the peaceful blue of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rippling o’er the poet’s shoulder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flows a maiden’s golden hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maiden lips, with love grown bolder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kiss his moon-lit forehead bare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Life is joy, and love is power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death all fetters doth unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strength and wisdom only flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When we toil for all our kind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope is truth⁠—the future giveth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than present takes away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the soul forever liveth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nearer God from day to day.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a word the maiden uttered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fullest hearts are slow to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a withered rose-leaf fluttered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down upon the poet’s cheek.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="elegy-on-the-death-of-dr-channing" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Elegy on the Death of Dr. Channing</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I do not come to weep above thy pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mourn the dying-out of noble powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poet’s clearer eye should see, in all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth’s seeming woe, seed of immortal flowers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Truth needs no champions: in the infinite deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of everlasting Soul her strength abides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Nature’s heart her mighty pulses leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through Nature’s veins her strength, undying, tides.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Peace is more strong than war, and gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where force were vain, makes conquest o’er the wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love lives on and hath a power to bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they who loved are hidden in the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sculptured marble brags of deathstrewn fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Glory’s epitaph is writ in blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Alexander now to Plato yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clarkson will stand where Wellington hath stood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I watch the circle of the eternal years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And read forever in the storied page</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One lengthened roll of blood, and wrong, and tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One onward step of Truth from age to age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The poor are crushed: the tyrants link their chain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The poet sings through narrow dungeon-grates;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s hope lies quenched; and, lo! with steadfast gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freedom doth forge her mail of adverse fates.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men slay the prophets; fagot, rack, and cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make up the groaning record of the past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Evil’s triumphs are her endless loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sovereign Beauty wins the soul at last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No power can die that ever wrought for Truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereby a law of Nature it became,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lives unwithered in its blithesome youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he who called it forth is but a name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore I cannot think thee wholly gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The better part of thee is with us still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy soul its hampering clay aside hath thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only freer wrestles with the ill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou livest in the life of all good things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What words thou spak’st for Freedom shall not die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sleepest not, for now thy Love hath wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To soar where hence thy Hope could hardly fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And often, from that other world, on this</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some gleams from great souls gone before may shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shed on struggling hearts a clearer bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clothe the Right with lustre more divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou art not idle: in thy higher sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy spirit bends itself to loving tasks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strength to perfect what it dreamed of here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is all the crown and glory that it asks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For sure, in Heaven’s wide chambers, there is room</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love and pity, and for helpful deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else were our summons thither but a doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To life more vain than this in clayey weeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From off the starry mountain-peak of song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy spirit shows me, in the coming time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An earth unwithered by the foot of wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A race revering its own soul sublime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What wars, what martyrdoms, what crimes, may come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou knowest not, nor I; but God will lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prodigal soul from want and sorrow home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Eden ope her gates to Adam’s seed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Farewell! good man, good angel now! this hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soon, like thine own, shall lose its cunning too;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon shall this soul, like thine, bewildered stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then leap to thread the free, unfathomed blue:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When that day comes, oh, may this hand grow cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Busy, like thine, for Freedom and the Right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, may this soul, like thine, be ever bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To face dark Slavery’s encroaching blight!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This laurel-leaf I cast upon thy bier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let worthier hands than these thy wreath intwine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy hearse I shed no useless tear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For us weep rather thou in calm divine!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas-on-freedom" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas on Freedom</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Men! whose boast it is that ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come of fathers brave and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If there breathe on earth a slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye truly free and brave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye do not feel the chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it works a brother’s pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye not base slaves indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaves unworthy to be freed?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Women! who shall one day bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons to breathe New England air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye hear, without a blush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeds to make the roused blood rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like red lava through your veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For your sisters now in chains⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answer! are ye fit to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mothers of the brave and free?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is true Freedom but to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fetters for our own dear sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with leathern hearts, forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we owe mankind a debt?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No! true freedom is to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the chains our brothers wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with heart and hand, to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earnest to make others free!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They are slaves who fear to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fallen and the weak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are slaves who will not choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hatred, scoffing, and abuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than in silence shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the truth they needs must think;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are slaves who dare not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the right with two or three.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="silence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Silence</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When the cup of hope brims over</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the soul hath drunk its fill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the loved-one meets the lover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their hearts in sunshine hover</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one impulse and one will⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the useless tongue is still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the heart is bare of gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the helpless sense of ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goads the apathy of sadness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward, through a whirl of madness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a darkness drear and chill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the palsied tongue is still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the soul for power sigheth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Struggling for Art’s fuller skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the prophet heart o’erflieth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the agony that trieth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All the teardrops it must spill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the tranced tongue is still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When two hearts that love are parted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And truth lingers but to kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they strive to be hardhearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the props of life are started</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a terror and a thrill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the choking tongue is still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When our souls youth’s dream-chains shiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we leap the World’s scant rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which had seemed a mighty river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaring on and on forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tween us and Self-trust’s steep hill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the trembling tongue is still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>0, sweet Silence! they belied thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have called thee vain and weak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speech is emptiness beside thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy and woe have glorified thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love and longing never seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Any better way to speak.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the deepest thoughts and feelings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the roots of life enfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passion’s sudden shocks and reelings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s first tremulous revealings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never can be fully to’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save by thee, revered of old!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1842.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-chippewa-legend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Chippewa Legend</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>[Greek: algeina men moi kaalegein estin tade, algos de sigan.]</p>
					<cite>Aeschylus, <i>Prom. Vinct.</i> 197, 198.</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">For the leading incidents in this tale I am indebted to the very valuable <i>Algic Researches</i> of Henry R. Schoolcraft, Esq. J. R. L.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The old Chief, feeling now wellnigh his end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called his two eldest children to his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave them, in few words, his parting charge!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘My son and daughter, me ye see no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happy hunting-grounds await me, green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With change of spring and summer through the year:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, for remembrance, after I am gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be kind to little Sheemah for my sake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weakling he is and young, and knows not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set the trap, or draw the seasoned bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore of both your loves he hath more need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he, who needeth love, to love hath right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not like our furs and stores of corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto we claim sole title by our toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Great Spirit plants it in our hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waters it, and gives it sun, to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The common stock and heritage of all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore be kind to Sheemah, that yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not be left deserted in your need.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Alone, beside a lake, their wigwam stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the other dwellings of their tribe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after many moons, the loneliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearied the elder brother, and he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Why should I dwell here far from men, shut out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the free, natural joys that fit my age?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, I am tall and strong, well skilled to hunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patient of toil and hunger, and not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have seen the danger which I dared not look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full in the face; what hinders me to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty Brave and Chief among my kin?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, taking up his arrows and his bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to hunt, he journeyed swiftly on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he gained the wigwams of his tribe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, choosing out a bride, he soon forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the fret and bustle of new life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little Sheemah and his father’s charge.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Now when the sister found her brother gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that, for many days, he came not back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wept for Sheemah more than for herself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Love bides longest in a woman’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flutters many times before he flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then doth perch so nearly, that a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May lure him back to his accustomed nest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Duty lingers even when Love is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft looking out in hope of his return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after Duty hath been driven forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Selfishness creeps in the last of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warming her lean hands at the lonely hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crouching o’er the embers, to shut out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever paltry warmth and light are left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With avaricious greed, from all beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, for long months, the sister hunted wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cared for little Sheemah tenderly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, daily more and more, the loneliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew wearisome, and to herself she sighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Am I not fair? at least the glassy pool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath no cause to flatter, tells me so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, oh, how flat and meaningless the tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless it tremble on a lover’s tongue!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty hath no true glass, except it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sweet privacy of loving eyes.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus deemed she idly, and forgot the lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which she had learned of nature and the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That beauty’s chief reward is to itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that Love’s mirror holds no image long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save of the inward fairness, blurred and lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless kept clear and white by Duty’s care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So she went forth and sought the haunts of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, being wedded, in her household cares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon, like the elder brother, quite forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little Sheemah and her father’s charge.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But Sheemah, left alone within the lodge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited and waited, with a shrinking heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking each rustle was his sister’s step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till hope grew less and less, and then went out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every sound was changed from hope to fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few sounds there were:⁠—the dropping of a nut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The squirrel’s chirrup, and the jay’s harsh scream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Autumn’s sad remnants of blithe Summer’s cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard at long intervals, seemed but to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreadful void of silence silenter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon what small store his sister left was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, through the Autumn, he made shift to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On roots and berries, gathered in much fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wolves, whose ghastly howl he heard ofttimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hollow and hungry, at the dead of night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Winter came at last, and, when the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick-heaped for gleaming leagues o’er hill and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread its unbroken silence over all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made bold by hunger, he was fain to glean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(More sick at heart than Ruth, and all alone)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the harvest of the merciless wolf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grim Boaz, who, sharp-ribbed and gaunt, yet feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thing more wild and starving than himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, by degrees, the wolf and he grew friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shared together all the winter through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Late in the Spring, when all the ice was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elder brother, fishing in the lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon whose edge his father’s wigwam stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard a low moaning noise upon the shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half like a child it seemed, half like a wolf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway there was something in his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That said, ‘It is thy brother Sheemah’s voice.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, paddling swiftly to the bank, he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a little thicket close at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child that seemed fast clinging to a wolf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the neck downward, gray with shaggy hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That still crept on and upward as he looked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The face was turned away, but well he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was Sheemah’s, even his brother’s face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with his trembling hands he hid his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowed his head, so that he might not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first look of his brother’s eyes, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O Sheemah! O my brother, speak to me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou not know me, that I am thy brother?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to me, little Sheemah, thou shall dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me henceforth, and know no care or want!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheemah was silent for a space, as if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘T were hard to summon up a human voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when he spake, the voice was as a wolf’s:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I know thee not, nor art thou what thou say’st;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have none other brethren than the wolves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, till thy heart be changed from what it is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art not worthy to be called their kin.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then groaned the other, with a choking tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Alas! my heart is changed right bitterly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis shrunk and parched within me even now!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, looking upward fearfully, he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a wolf that shrank away, and ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ugly and fierce, to hide among the woods.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-c-l" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To A. C. L.</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Through suffering and sorrow thou hast passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show us what a woman true may be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have not taken sympathy from thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor made thee any other than thou wast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save as some tree, which, in a sudden blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheddeth those blossoms, that are weakly grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the air, but keepeth every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose strength gives warrant of good fruit at last:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thou hast shed some blooms of gayety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never one of steadfast cheerfulness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hath thy knowledge of adversity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robbed thee of any faith in happiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rather cleared thine inner eyes to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many simple ways there are to bless.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-were-i-love-if-i-were-stripped-of-thee" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">What Were I, Love, if I Were Stripped of Thee</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What were I, Love, if I were stripped of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thine eyes shut me out whereby I live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, who unto my calmer soul dost give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowledge, and Truth, and holy Mystery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein Truth mainly lies for those who see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the earthly and the fugitive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the grandeur of the soul believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only in the Infinite are free?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without thee I were naked, bleak, and bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As yon dead cedar on the sea-cliff’s brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nature’s teachings, which come to me now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Common and beautiful as light and air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would be as fruitless as a stream which still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slips through the wheel of some old ruined mill.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="impatience-and-reproof" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Impatience and Reproof</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, I have felt a weariness of soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shaking of my loveful faith in man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jostling with souls that ne’er beyond life’s span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have glimpsed, to whom this empty earth is goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And starting-place, and death the dreadful whole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as, within the parlour’s glare, at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid loud laugh, and converse vain and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden without is heard the thunder’s roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-toned and infinite, with sad reproof⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, when my love and faith in man are shaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great, inborn thoughts, that will not keep aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my soul like those far thunders, waken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growing and growing, till its depths are dinned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sad sense of having deadly sinned.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1841.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="reformers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Reformers</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If ye have not the one great lesson learned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which grows in leaves, tides in the mighty sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the stars eternally hath burned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That only full obedience is free⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye in pride your true birthright have spurned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, for a mess of pottage, beggarly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have sold it, how, in Truth’s name, have ye earned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holy right to fight for Liberty?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be free, and then our God will give a sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefor Orion’s belt were not too bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There shall be power in your lightest word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make weak Falsehood, pierced with arrowy light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writhe, dying of her own most foul disease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within her churches and her palaces!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1841.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-fiery-trial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fiery Trial</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The hungry flame hath never yet been hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him who won his name and crown of fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it doth ask a stronger soul and higher</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear, not longing for a prouder lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those martyrdoms whereof the world knows not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope sneaped with frosty scorn, the faith of youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasted in seeming vain defence of Truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greatness o’ertopped with baseness, and fame got</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late:⁠—Yet this most bitter task was meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For those right worthy in such cause to plead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore God sent poets, men content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live in humbleness and body’s need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they may tread the path where Jesus went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sow one grain of Love’s eternal seed.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1841.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="great-truths-are-portions-of-the-soul-of-man" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Great Truths Are Portions of the Soul of Man</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Great Truths are portions of the soul of man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great souls are portions of Eternity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each drop of blood that e’er through true heart ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lofty message, ran for thee and me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For God’s law, since the starry song began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath been, and still forevermore must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every deed which shall outlast Time’s span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must spur the soul to be erect and free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slave is no word of deathless lineage sprung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too many noble souls have thought and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too many mighty poets lived and sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our good Saxon, from lips purified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With martyr-fire, throughout the world hath rung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too long to have God’s holy cause denied.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-ask-not-for-those-thoughts-that-sudden-leap" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Ask Not for Those Thoughts, That Sudden Leap</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I ask not for those thoughts, that sudden leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From being’s sea, like the isle-seeming Kraken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whose great rise the ocean all is shaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a heart-tremble quivers through the deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me that growth which some perchance deem sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith the steadfast coral-stems uprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, by the toil of gathering energies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their upward way into clear sunshine keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until, by Heaven’s sweetest influences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly and slowly spreads a speck of green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a pleasant island in the seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, mid fall palms, the cane-roofed home is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wearied men shall sit at sunset’s hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing the leaves and loving God’s dear power.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-m-w-on-her-birthday" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To M. W., on Her Birthday</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Maiden, when such a soul as thine is born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning-stars their ancient music make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, joyful, once again their song awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long silent now with melancholy scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, not mindless of so blest a morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By no least deed its harmony shalt break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shalt to that high chime thy footsteps take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through life’s most darksome passes unforlorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore from thy pure faith thou shalt not fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore shalt thou be ever fair and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thine every motion musical</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As summer air, majestic as the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mystery to those who creep and crawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Time, and part it from Eternity.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="my-love-i-have-no-fear-that-thou-shouldst-die" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">My Love, I Have No Fear That Thou Shouldst Die</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My Love, I have no fear that thou shouldst die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit I ask no fairer life than this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose numbering-clock is still thy gentle kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Time and Peace with hands enlockèd fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet care I not where in Eternity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We live and love, well knowing that there is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No backward step for those who feel the bliss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Faith as their most lofty yearnings high:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love hath so purified my being’s core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meseems I scarcely should be startled even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find, some morn, that thou hadst gone before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since, with thy love, this knowledge too was given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which each calm day doth strengthen more and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they who love are but one step from Heaven.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-cannot-think-that-thou-shouldst-pass-away" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Cannot Think That Thou Shouldst Pass Away</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I cannot think that thou shouldst pass away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose life to mine is an eternal law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A piece of nature that can have no flaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new and certain sunrise every day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if thou art to be another ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the Sun of Life, and art to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free from what part of thee was fugitive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The debt of Love I will more fully pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not downcast with the thought of thee so high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rather raised to be a nobler man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more divine in my humanity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As knowing that the waiting eyes which scan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My life are lighted by a purer being,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask high, calm-browed deeds, with it agreeing.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-haven" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Haven</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Into the unruffled shelter of thy love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My bark leapt homeward from a rugged sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And furled its sails, and dropped right peacefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope’s anchor, quiet as a nested dove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou givest me all that can the true soul move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To nobleness⁠—a clear simplicity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, in the humblest man to-day, can see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Theme for high rhyme as ever poet wove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noiseless love that makes things common rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And custom-weary toil with heaven rife⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A faith that finds great meanings everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, to the soul’s high level, raiseth life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And puts in eyes, that could but dimly see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The calm, vast presence of Eternity.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1841.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="resolve" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Resolve</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In very truth, thou never art away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though miles between us cheat mine outward sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I do feel thee, both by night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hope fulfilled, a starry influence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That floweth through my most forgetful deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maketh crystal every part of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sowing the common earth with golden seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright as if dropped down from the Galaxy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sooth, when we have seemed most far divided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I inly felt we were most truly near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then a light from thy great love hath glided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all that desert space, to give me cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as light only where it strikes we see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men shall know this in my nobility.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1841.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="there-never-yet-was-flower-fair-in-vain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">There Never Yet Was Flower Fair in Vain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There never yet was flower fair in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let classic poets rhyme it as they will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seasons toil that it may blow again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summer’s heart doth feel its every ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor is a true soul ever born for naught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever any such hath lived and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There hath been something for true freedom wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some bulwark levelled on the evil side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toil on, then, Greatness! thou art in the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However narrow souls may call thee wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be as thou wouldst be in thine own clear sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so thou shalt be in the world’s erelong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For worldlings cannot, struggle as they may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From man’s great soul one great thought hide away.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sub-pondere-crescit" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sub Pondere Crescit</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The hope of Truth grows stronger, day by day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear the soul of Man around me waking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a great sea, its frozen fetters breaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flinging up to heaven its sunlit spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossing huge continents in scornful play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crushing them, with din of grinding thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes old emptinesses stare in wonder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The memory of a glory passed away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingers in every heart, as, in the shell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resounds the bygone freedom of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every hour new signs of promise tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the great soul shall once again be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For high, and yet more high, the murmurs swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of inward strife for truth and liberty.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-spirit-of-keats" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Spirit of Keats</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Great soul, thou sittest with me in my room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifting me with thy vast, quiet eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On whose full orbs, with kindly lustre, lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twilight warmth of ruddy ember-gloom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy clear, strong tones will oft bring sudden bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hope secure, to him who lonely cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrestling with the young poet’s agonies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neglect and scorn, which seem a certain doom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes! the few words which, like great thunder-drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy large heart down to earth shook doubtfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled by the inward lightning of its might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serene and pure, like gushing joy of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall track the eternal chords of Destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the moon-led pulse of ocean stops.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-poet-poet-thou-art-most-wealthy-being-poor" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Poet</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Poet! Thou Art Most Wealthy, Being Poor</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Poet! thou art most wealthy, being poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For are not thine the only earthly ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made rich with golden music of the spheres?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou not snowy wings whereon to soar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the wide air of after and before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set thee high among thy crowned peers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath any man such joy as thy deep tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or eyes like thine to pierce great nature’s core?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast the fairy coin, which, in wrong hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is merely stones and leaves⁠—in thine, true gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art the very strength of all men’s shields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By divine right, art monarch of all lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there is none but willing tribute yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of worth too precious to be bought or sold.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1841.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="beloved-in-the-noisy-city-here" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Beloved, in the Noisy City Here</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Beloved, in the noisy city here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought of thee can make all turmoil cease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around my spirit, folds thy spirit clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its still, soft arms, and circles it with peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no room for any doubt or fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In souls so overfilled with love’s increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no memory of the bygone year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But growth in heart’s and spirit’s perfect ease:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How hath our love, half nebulous at first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rounded itself into a full-orbed sun!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How have our lives and wills (as haply erst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were, ere this forgetfulness begun)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all their earthly distances outburst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And melted, like two rays of light in one!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="full-many-noble-friends-my-soul-hath-known" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Full Many Noble Friends My Soul Hath Known</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Full many noble friends my soul hath known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Women and men, who in my memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have sown such beauty as can never die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many times, when I seem all alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my heart I call up, one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The joys I shared with them, the unlaced hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of laughing thoughts, that came and went like flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or higher argument, Apollo’s own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those listening eyes that gave nobility</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To humblest verses writ and read for love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those burning words of high democracy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those doubts that through the vague abyss would rove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lean o’er chasms that took away the breath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I forget them, may it be in death!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1842.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="how-oft-do-i-live-oer-that-blissful-time" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">How Oft Do I Live O’er That Blissful Time</h2>
			<p>
				<span>How oft do I live o’er that blissful time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first I found thy love within my breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the first violet in April’s prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born a full flower, more fair than all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And richer with the early dew of rhyme!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till then, I felt my heart was but a guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad world, but now there is no clime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it as rightful sovereign may not rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever Nature even a weed doth plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There it the fulness of delight may win;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No dead or living thing will let it want,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None but whose heart will freely take it in;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Love hath made it now wise Nature’s child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from her arms it cannot be exiled.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1842.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="slow-opening-flower-of-the-summer-morn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Slow-Opening Flower of the Summer Morn</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Slow-opening flower of the summer morn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blithe quietness of sun-delighted dew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green inland oceans of unrippling corn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep thoughtfulness of never-wrinkled blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose high, eternal silence seemeth born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the lone moon and stars to wander through⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunset⁠—and all the wreaths by Nature worn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And momently thrown by for beauties new⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart grows fragrant while on you I look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And murmurs to itself, and feels at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trembles, like a sunny birch-tree shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rustling sparkles by a warm noon-breeze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, when I see my Love, my heart runs o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sympathies and strengths undreamed before.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1842.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="on-reading-wordsworths-sonnets-in-defence-of-capital-punishment" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Reading Wordsworth’s Sonnets in Defence of Capital Punishment</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As the broad ocean endlessly upheaveth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the majestic beating of his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty tides, whereof its rightful part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each sea-wide bay and little weed receiveth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, through his soul who earnestly believeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life from the universal Heart doth flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby some conquest of the eternal Woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By instinct of God’s nature, he achieveth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fuller pulse of this all-powerful beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the poet’s gulf-like heart doth tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he more keenly feels the glorious duty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of serving Truth, despised and crucified⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy, unknowing sect or creed, to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel God flow forever through his breast.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-same-continued" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Same Continued</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Once hardly in a cycle blossometh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A flower-like soul ripe with the seeds of song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spirit foreordained to cope with wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose divine thoughts are natural as breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who the old Darkness thickly scattereth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With starry words, that shoot prevailing light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the deeps, and wither, with the blight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of serene Truth, the coward heart of Death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe, if such spirit thwart its errand high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mock with lies the longing soul of man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one age longer must true Culture lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothing her bitter fetters as she can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until new messages of love out-start</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the next beating of the infinite Heart.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-same-continued" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Same Continued</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The love of all things springs from love of one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wider the soul’s horizon hourly grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over it with fuller glory flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky-like spirit of God; a hope begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In doubt and darkness ’neath a fairer sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cometh to fruitage, if it be of Truth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the law of meekness, faith, and ruth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By inward sympathy, shall all be won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This thou shouldst know, who, from the painted feature</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shifting Fashion, couldst thy brethren turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the love of ever-youthful Nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of a beauty fadeless and eterne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always ’tis the saddest sight to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man faithless in Humanity.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-same-continued" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Same Continued</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A poet cannot strive for despotism;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His harp falls shattered; for it still must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The instinct of great spirits to be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sworn foes of cunning barbarism:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who has deepest searched the wide abysm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that life-giving Soul which men call fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knows that to put more faith in lies and hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than truth and love is the true atheism:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upward the soul forever turns her eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The next hour always shames the hour before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One beauty, at its highest, prophesies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by whose side it shall seem mean and poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Godlike thing knows aught of less and less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But widens to the boundless Perfectness.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-same-continued" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Same Continued</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore think not the Past is wise alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Yesterday knows nothing of the Best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt love it only as the nest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence glory-wingèd things to Heaven have flown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great Soul only are all things known;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Present and future are to her as past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While she in glorious madness doth forecast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That perfect bud, which seems a flower full-blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each new Prophet, and yet always opes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fuller and fuller with each day and hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heartening the soul with odor of fresh hopes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longings high, and gushings of wide power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet never is or shall be fully blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save in the forethought of the Eternal One.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-same-concluded" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Same Concluded</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Far ‘yond this narrow parapet of Time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyes uplift, the poet’s soul should look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the Endless Promise, nor should brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One prying doubt to shake his faith sublime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him the earth is ever in her prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dewiness of morning; he can see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good lying hid, from all eternity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the teeming womb of sin and crime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul should not be cramped by any bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His nobleness should be so Godlike high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his least deed is perfect as a star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His common look majestic as the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all o’erflooded with a light from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undimmed by clouds of weak mortality.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-m-o-s" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To M. O. S.</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Mary, since first I knew thee, to this hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My love hath deepened, with my wiser sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what in Woman is to reverence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy clear heart, fresh as e’er was forest-flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still opens more to me its beauteous dower;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let praise hush⁠—Love asks no evidence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove itself well-placed: we know not whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It gleans the straws that thatch its humble bower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We can but say we found it in the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring of all sweetest thoughts, arch foe of blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sower of flowers in the dusty mart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure vestal of the poet’s holy flame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is enough, and we have done our part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we but keep it spotless as it came.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="our-love-is-not-a-fading-earthly-flower" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Our Love Is Not a Fading, Earthly Flower</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Our love is not a fading, earthly flower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its wingèd seed dropped down from Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, nursed by day and night, by sun and shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth momently to fresher beauty rise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us the leafless autumn is not bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor winter’s rattling boughs lack lusty green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our summer hearts make summer’s fulness, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No leaf, or bud, or blossom may be seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nature’s life in love’s deep life doth lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love⁠—whose forgetfulness is beauty’s death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mystic key these cells of Thou and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the infinite freedom openeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes the body’s dark and narrow grate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide-flung leaves of Heaven’s own palace-gate.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="thankfulness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Thankfulness</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There is no thankfulness more deep than this⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love and love with ever-glad increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To nestle in the heart with fluttering bliss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think that now is the full tide of peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still to find, with each sun-circled hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A higher right to love, unhoped before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fuller insight, a serener power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That widens down the soul’s unfathomed core:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel that we are blest is thankfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereby with exulting faith to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every human heart its kind must bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With love, which, garnered up, rusts into woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, freely given, always turns again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for our flowers, brings us ripened grain.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1842.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="in-absence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In Absence</h2>
			<p>
				<span>These rugged, wintry days I scarce could bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I not know that, in the early spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When wild March winds upon their errands sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst return, bursting on this still air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those same winds, when, startled from their lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hunt up violets, and free swift brooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From icy cares, even as thy clear looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid my heart bloom, and sing, and break all care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When drops with welcome rain the April day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My flowers shall find their April in thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save there the rain in dreamy clouds doth stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As loath to fall out of those happy skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet sure, my love, thou art most like to May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That comes with steady sun when April dies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="wendell-phillips" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Wendell Phillips</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He stood upon the world’s broad threshold; wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The din of tattle and of slaughter rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw God stand upon the weaker side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sank in seeming loss before its foes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many there were who made great haste and sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the cunning enemy their swords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scorned their gifts of fame, and power, and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, underneath their soft and flowery words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the cold serpent hiss; therefore he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And humbly joined him to the weaker part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fanatic named, and fool, yet well content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he could he the nearer to God’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel its solemn pulses sending blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the widespread veins of endless good.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-street" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Street</h2>
			<p>
				<span>They pass me by like shadows, crowds on crowds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim ghosts of men, that hover to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hugging their bodies round them like thin shrouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein their souls were buried long ago:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They trampled on their youth, and faith, and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cast their hope of human kind away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Heaven’s clear messages they madly strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conquered⁠—and their spirits turned to clay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! how they wander round the world, their grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose ever-gaping maw by such is fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gibbering at living men, and idly rave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘We only truly live, but ye are dead.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! poor fools, the anointed eye may trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dead soul’s epitaph in every face!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-grieve-not-that-ripe-knowledge-takes-away" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Grieve Not That Ripe Knowledge Takes Away</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I grieve not that ripe Knowledge takes away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charm that Nature to my childhood wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, with that insight, cometh, day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A greater bliss than wonder was before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The real doth not clip the poet’s wings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win the secret of a weed’s plain heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reveals some clue to spiritual things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stumbling guess becomes firm-footed art:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowers are not flowers unto the poet’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their beauty thrills him by an inward sense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows that outward seemings are but lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, at the most, but earthly shadows, whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul that looks within for truth may guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presence of some wondrous heavenliness.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ye-who-behold-the-body-of-my-thought" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Ye Who Behold the Body of My Thought</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ye who behold the body of my thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose minds can surfeit on an outward grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye learn but half the lesson that is taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking no deeper down than Nature’s face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two meanings have our lightest fantasies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the flesh, and of the spirit one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who skips the latter only sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The painter’s colors and the sculptor’s stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfathomably deep are all good things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each day therefrom the soul may drink its fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight a clearer truth to being springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-renewing fount o’errunneth still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the unconscious poet can but write</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is foretold him by the Infinite.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="o-happy-childhood-dear-unthoughtful-years" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">O, Happy Childhood! Dear, Unthoughtful Years</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O, happy childhood! dear, unthoughtful years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When life flawed onward like a rover wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why did I leave your peace of heart behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plunge me in this sea of doubts and fears?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down, foolish sigh! have not my manhood’s tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washed off the scales that made my nature blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Letting Truth’s growing light sure passage find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my soul, where now the sky half-clears?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thank God that I am numbered now with men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there are hearts that need my love and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have sorrows now to make me ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My strength and weakness, and my right to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother to those, the outcast and the poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven back to darkness from the world’s proud door!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-my-twenty-fourth-birth-day-february-22-1843" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On My Twenty-Fourth Birth-Day, February 22, 1843</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Now have I quite passed by that cloudy If</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That darkened the wild hope of boyish days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first I launched my slender-sided skiff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wide sea’s dim, unsounded ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now doth Love’s sun my soul with splendor fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hope hath struggled upward into Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft Wish is hardened into sinewy Will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Longing into Certainty doth tower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The love of beauty knoweth no despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart would break, if I should dare to doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the Wrong, which makes its dragon’s lair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on the Earth, fair T ruth shall wander out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teaching mankind, that Freedom ’s held in fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only by those who labor to set free.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-j-r-giddings" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To J. R. Giddings</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Giddings, far rougher names than thine have grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoother than honey on the lips of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt aye be honorably known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who bravely used his tongue and pen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As best befits a freeman⁠—even for those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom our Law’s unblushing front denies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A right to plead against the lifelong woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which are the Negro’s glimpse of Freedom’s skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear nothing, and hope all things, as the Right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone may do securely; every hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thrones of Ignorance and ancient Night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lose somewhat of their long-usurpèd power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Freedom’s lightest word can make them shiver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a base dread that clings to them forever.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-thought-our-love-at-full-but-i-did-err" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">I Thought Our Love at Full, but I Did Err</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I thought our love at full, but I did err;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy’s wreath drooped o’er mine eyes; I could not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sorrow in our happy world must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s deepest spokesman and interpreter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as a mother feels her child first stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under her heart, so felt I instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in my soul another bond to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrill with that life we saw depart from her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O mother of our angel child! twice dear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death knits as well as parts, and still, I wis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her tender radiance shall infold us here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as the light, borne up by inward bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threads the void glooms of space without a fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To print on farthest stars her pitying kiss.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="columbus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Columbus</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The cordage creaks and rattles in the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whims of sudden hush; the reeling sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now thumps like solid rock beneath the stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now leaps with clumsy wrath, strikes short, and, falling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crumbled to whispery foam, slips rustling down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broad backs of the waves, which jostle and crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fling themselves upon that unknown shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their used familiar since the dawn of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither this foredoomed life is guided on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sway on triumph’s hushed, aspiring poise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One glittering moment, then to break fulfilled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How lonely is the sea’s perpetual swing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The melancholy wash of endless waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sigh of some grim monster undescried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear-painted on the canvas of the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shifting on his uneasy pillow of brine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, night brings more companions than the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this drear waste; new constellations burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fairer stars, with whose calm height my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds nearer sympathy than with my herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earthen souls, whose vision’s scanty ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes me its prisoner to beat my wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the cold bars of their unbelief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing in vain my own free heaven beyond.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God! this world, so crammed with eager life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That comes and goes and wanders back to silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the idle wind, which yet man’s shaping mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can make his drudge to swell the longing sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of highest endeavor⁠—this mad, unthrift world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, every hour, throws life enough away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make her deserts kind and hospitable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets her great destinies be waved aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By smooth, lip-reverent, formal infidels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who weigh the God they not believe with gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find no spot in Judas, save that he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving a duller bargain than he ought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saddled his guild with too cheap precedent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Faith! if thou art strong, thine opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is mighty also, and the dull fool’s sneer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath ofttimes shot chill palsy through the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just lifted to achieve its crowning deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made the firm-based heart, that would have quailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rack or fagot, shudder like a leaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrinkled with frost, and loose upon its stem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wicked and the weak, by some dark law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have a strange power to shut and rivet down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their own horizon round us, to unwing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our heaven-aspiring visions, and to blur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With surly clouds the Future’s gleaming peaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far seen across the brine of thankless years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the chosen soul could never be alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deep mid-silence, open-doored to God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No greatness ever had been dreamed or done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among dull hearts a prophet never grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nurse of full-grown souls is solitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The old world is effete; there man with man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jostles, and, in the brawl for means to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life is trod underfoot⁠—Life, the one block</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of marble that’s vouchsafed wherefrom to carve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our great thoughts, white and godlike, to shine down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The future, Life, the irredeemable block,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which one o’er-hasty chisel-dint oft mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scanting our room to cut the features out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our full hope, so forcing us to crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a mean head the perfect limbs, or leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god’s face glowing o’er a satyr’s trunk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Failure’s brief epitaph.</span>
					<span>Yes, Europe’s world</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reels on to judgment; there the common need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Losing God’s sacred use, to be a bond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt Me and Thee, sets each one scowlingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er his own selfish hoard at bay; no state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knit strongly with eternal fibres up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all men’s separate and united weals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Self-poised and sole as stars, yet one as light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds up a shape of large Humanity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which by natural instinct every man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pays loyalty exulting, by which all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mould their own lives, and feel their pulses filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the red, fiery blood of the general life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making them mighty in peace, as now in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are, even in the flush of victory, weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conquering that manhood which should them subdue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what gift bring I to this untried world?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the same tragedy be played anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the same lurid curtain drop at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one dread desolation, one fierce crash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that recoil which on its makers God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets Ignorance and Sin and Hunger make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early or late? Or shall that commonwealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose potent unity and concentric force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can draw these scattered joints and parts of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a whole ideal man once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which sucks not from its limbs the life away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sends it flood-tide and creates itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over again in every citizen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be there built up? For me, I have no choice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might turn back to other destinies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one sincere key opes all Fortune’s doors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whoso answers not God’s earliest call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forfeits or dulls that faculty supreme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lying open to his genius</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which makes the wise heart certain of its ends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here am I; for what end God knows, not I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Westward still points the inexorable soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here am I, with no friend but the sad sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beating heart of this great enterprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, without me, would stiffen in swift death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This have I mused on, since mine eye could first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the stars distinguish and with joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest on that God-fed Pharos of the north,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On some blue promontory of heaven lighted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That juts far out into the upper sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this one hope my heart hath clung for years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As would a foundling to the talisman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung round his neck by hands he knew not whose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poor, vile thing and dross to all beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he therein can feel a virtue left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the sad pressure of a mother’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unto him it still is tremulous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With palpitating haste and wet with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The key to him of hope and humanness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coarse shell of life’s pearl, Expectancy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hope hath been to me for love and fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath made me wholly lonely on the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Building me up as in a thick-ribbed tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith enwalled my watching spirit burned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conquering its little island from the Dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole as a scholar’s lamp, and heard men’s steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the far hurry of the outward world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass dimly forth and back, sounds heard in dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Ganymede by the eagle was snatched up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the gross sod to be Jove’s cup-bearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was I lifted by my great design:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who hath trod Olympus, from his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fades not that broader outlook of the gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life’s low valleys overbrow earth’s clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that Olympian spectre of the past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looms towering up in sovereign memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckoning his soul from meaner heights of doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had but the shadow of the Thunderer’s bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashing athwart my spirit, made of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A swift-betraying vision’s Ganymede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet to have greatly dreamed precludes low ends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great days have ever such a morning-red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On such a base great futures are built up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aspiration, though not put in act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes back to ask its plighted troth again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still watches round its grave the unlaid ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a dead virtue, and makes other hopes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that implacable one, seem thin and bleak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As shadows of bare trees upon the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound freezing there by the unpitying moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While other youths perplexed their mandolins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying that Thetis would her fingers twine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the loose glories of her lover’s hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wile another kiss to keep back day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, stretched beneath the many-centuried shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some writhed oak, the wood’s Laocoön,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did of my hope a dryad mistress make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I would woo to meet me privily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or underneath the stars, or when the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flecked all the forest floor with scattered pearls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O days whose memory tames to fawning down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surly fell of Ocean’s bristled neck!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know not when this hope enthralled me first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from my boyhood up I loved to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tall pine-forests of the Apennine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmur their hoary legends of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hearing, I in vision clear beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sudden dark of tropic night shut down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the huge whisper of great watery wastes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while a pair of herons trailingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flapped inland, where some league-wide river hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow spoil of unconjectured realms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far through a gulf’s green silence, never scarred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By any but the Northwind’s hurrying keels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not the pines alone; all sights and sounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my world-seeking heart paid fealty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catered for it as the Cretan bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought honey to the baby Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in his soft hand crushed a violet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike foremusing the rough thunder’s gripe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did I entertain the poet’s song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My great Idea’s guest, and, passing o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That iron bridge the Tuscan built to hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard Ulysses tell of mountain-chains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose adamantine links, his manacles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The western main shook growling, and still gnawed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I brooded on the wise Athenian’s tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of happy Atlantis, and heard Björne’s keel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crunch the gray pebbles of the Vinland shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I listened, musing, to the prophecy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nero’s tutor-victim; lo, the birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing darkling, conscious of the climbing dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I believed the poets; it is they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who utter wisdom from the central deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, listening to the inner flow of things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to the age out of eternity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah me! old hermits sought for solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In caves and desert places of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where their own heart-beat was the only stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of living thing that comforted the year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the bald pillar-top of Simeon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In midnight’s blankest waste, were populous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matched with the isolation drear and deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him who pines among the swarm of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once a new thought’s king and prisoner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling the truer life within his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fountain of his spirit’s prophecy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinking away and wasting, drop by drop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the ungrateful sands of sceptic ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He in the palace-aisles of untrod woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth walk a king; for him the pent-up cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Widens beyond the circles of the stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the sceptred spirits of the past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thronging in to greet him as their peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the market-place’s glare and throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sits apart, an exile, and his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aches with the mocking memory of its crown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet to the spirit select there is no choice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cannot say, This will I do, or that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the cheap means putting Heaven’s ends in pawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bartering his bleak rocks, the freehold stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of destiny’s first-born, for smoother fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That yield no crop of self-denying will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hand is stretched to him from out the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which grasping without question, he is led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where there is work that he must do for God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trial still is the strength’s complement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the uncertain, dizzy path that scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheer heights of supremest purposes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is steeper to the angel than the child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chances have laws as fixed as planets have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And disappointment’s dry and bitter root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Envy’s harsh berries, and the choking pool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the world’s scorn, are the right mother-milk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the tough hearts that pioneer their kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And break a pathway to those unknown realms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the earth’s broad shadow lie enthralled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endurance is the crowning quality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And patience all the passion of great hearts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are their stay, and when the leaden world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets its hard face against their fateful thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brute strength, like the Gaulish conqueror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clangs his huge glaive down in the other scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inspired soul but flings his patience in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slowly that outweighs the ponderous globe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One faith against a whole earth’s unbelief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One soul against the flesh of all mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus ever seems it when my soul can hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice that errs not; then my triumph gleams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the blank ocean beckoning, and all night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart flies on before me as I sail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on I see my lifelong enterprise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rose like Ganges mid the freezing snows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a world’s solitude, sweep broadening down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, gathering to itself a thousand streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow sacred ere it mingle with the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see the ungated wall of chaos old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blocks Cyclopean hewn of solid night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fade like a wreath of unreturning mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the irreversible feet of light;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo, with what clear omen in the east</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On day’s gray threshold stands the eager dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like young Leander rosy from the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Glowing at Hero’s lattice!</span>
					<span>One day more</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These muttering shoalbrains leave the helm to me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God, let me not in their dull ooze be stranded:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not this one frail bark, to hollow which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have dug out the pith and sinewy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my aspiring life’s fair trunk, be so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast up to warp and blacken in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as the opposing wind ‘gins whistle off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cheek-swollen pack, and from the leaning mast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Fortune’s full sail strains forward!</span>
					<span>One poor day!⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember whose and not how short it is!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is God’s day, it is Columbus’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lavish day! One day, with life and heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is more than time enough to find a world.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-incident-of-the-fire-at-hamburg" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Incident of the Fire at Hamburg</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The tower of old Saint Nicholas soared upward to the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like some huge piece of Nature’s make, the growth of centuries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could not deem its crowding spires a work of human art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seemed to struggle lightward from a sturdy living heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not Nature’s self more freely speaks in crystal or in oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than, through the pious builder’s hand, in that gray pile she spoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as from acorn springs the oak, so, freely and alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from his heart this hymn to God, sung in obedient stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It seemed a wondrous freak of chance, so perfect, yet so rough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A whim of Nature crystallized slowly in granite tough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thick spires yearned towards the sky in quaint harmonious lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in broad sunlight basked and slept, like a grove of blasted pines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never did rock or stream or tree lay claim with better right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the adorning sympathies of shadow and of light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in that forest petrified, as forester there dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stout Herman, the old sacristan, sole lord of all its bells.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Surge leaping after surge, the fire roared onward red as blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till half of Hamburg lay engulfed beneath the eddying flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For miles away the fiery spray poured down its deadly rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And back and forth the billows sucked, and paused, and burst again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From square to square with tiger leaps panted the lustful fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air to leeward shuddered with the gasps of its desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And church and palace, which even now stood whelmed but to the knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lift their black roofs like breakers lone amid the whirling sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Up in his tower old Herman sat and watched with quiet look;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul had trusted God too long to be at last forsook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not fear, for surely God a pathway would unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through this red sea for faithful hearts, as once He did of old.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But scarcely can he cross himself, or on his good saint call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the sacrilegious flood o’erleaped the churchyard wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, ere a <i>pater</i> half was said, mid smoke and crackling glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His island tower scarce juts its head above the wide despair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon the peril’s desperate peak his heart stood up sublime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His first thought was for God above, his next was for his chime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sing now and make your voices heard in hymns of praise,’ cried he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘As did the Israelites of old, safe walking through the sea!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Through this red sea our God hath made the pathway safe to shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our promised land stands full in sight; shout now as ne’er before!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the tower came crashing down, the bells, in clear accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pealed forth the grand old German hymn⁠—‘All good souls, praise the</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-epitaph" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Epitaph</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What means this glozing epitaph,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless its errand be to shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with a mocking devil’s laugh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The frail delusion of that fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which but embalms an empty name?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As columns, when the roof is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which they were reared to hold on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are merely idle shafts of stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, forced to tell-an endless lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do but deride the passer-by;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So stand these legends in Death’s halls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vain figures on a dial-plate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon no gnomon’s shadow falls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor inch-deep characters, that prate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of empire over Time and Fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When eye, and tongue, and heart are null,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What profits then the laurel wreath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twined loathsome round a grinning skull?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Food crammed between a corpse’s teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To win a deeper sneer from Death!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O high Ambition! can there be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No epitaph in league with Time?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is life a ship’s track in the sea?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are all these hopes and aims sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mere architecture of frail rime?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Doth God implant for worse than naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This huge desire of memory?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot some monument be wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from its moveless height shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Pyramids’ last 6bsequy?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To be a glimpse of summer sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the bleak hearts of the poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make God’s sunshine evident,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By opening Eden’s humble door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To souls where darkness reigned before;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To make this cloudy life a part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the eternal grace beyond;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To forge the vague dreams of the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into a mighty sceptre-wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose touch makes freemen of the bond;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Methinks a life thus spent should rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A monument in Fate’s despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose epitaph would grow more clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Truth’s sun rose and scattered light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full and more full, from Heaven’s glad height.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let it be graven on my tomb:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He came and left more smiles behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One ray he shot athwart the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He helped one fetter-to unbind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men think of him and grow more kind.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>1844,</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="hunger-and-cold" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hunger and Cold</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Sisters two, all praise to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your faces pinched and blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the poor man you’ve been true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From of old:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can speak the keenest word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are sure of being heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the point you’re never stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let sleek statesmen temporize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Palsied are their shifts and lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they meet your bloodshot eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Grim and bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Policy you set at naught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their traps you’ll not be caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re too honest to be bought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bolt and bar the palace door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the mass of men are poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naked truth grows more and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Uncontrolled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You had never yet, I guess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any praise for bashfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can visit sans court-dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While the music fell and rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dance reeled to its close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where her round of costly woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fashion strolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I beheld with shuddering fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wolves’ eyes through the windows peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little dream they you are near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the toiler’s heart you clutch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conscience is not valued much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He recks not a bloody smutch</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On his gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything to you defers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are potent reasoners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At your whisper Treason stirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rude comparisons you draw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words refuse to sate your maw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your gaunt limbs the cobweb law</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Cannot hold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re not clogged with foolish pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But can seize a right denied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somehow God is on your side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You respect no hoary wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More for having triumphed long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its past victims, haggard throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You unbury: swords and spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaker are than poor men’s tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaker than your silent years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let them guard both hall and bower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the window you will glower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patient till your reckoning hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Shall be tolled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheeks are pale, but hands are red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiltless blood may chance be shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye must and will be fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God has plans man must not spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some were made to starve and toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some to share the wine and oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">We are told:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devil’s theories are these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stifling hope and love and peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Framed your hideous lusts to please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scatter ashes on thy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tears of burning sorrow shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth! and be by Pity led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To Love’s fold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere they block the very door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lean corpses of the poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will hush for naught but gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hunger and Cold!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-landlord" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Landlord</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What boot your houses and your lands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In spite of close-drawn deed and fence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like water, twixt your cheated hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They slip into the graveyard’s sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mock your ownership’s pretence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How shall you speak to urge your right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Choked with that soil for which you lust?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bit of clay, for whose delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You grasp, is mortgaged, too; Death might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foreclose this very day in dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fence as you please, this plain poor man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose only fields are in his wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shapes the world, as best he can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to God’s higher plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Owns you, and fences as is fit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though yours the rents, his incomes wax</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By right of eminent domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From factory tall to woodman’s axe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things on earth must pay their tax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To feed his hungry heart and brain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He takes you from your easy-chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what he plans that you must do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You sleep in down, eat dainty fare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mounts his crazy garret-stair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And starves, the landlord over you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Feeding the clods your idlesse drains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You make more green six feet of soil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fruitful word, like suns and rains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Partakes the seasons’ bounteous pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And toils to lighten human toil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Your lands, with force or cunning got,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shrink to the measure of the grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Death himself abridges not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tenures of almighty thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The titles of the wise and brave.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-pine-tree" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Pine-Tree</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Far up on Katahdin thou towerest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Purple-blue with the distance and vast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a cloud o’er the lowlands thou lowerest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hangs poised on a lull in the blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To its fall leaning awful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the storm, like a prophet o’er-maddened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou singest and tossest thy branches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heart with the terror is gladdened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou forebodest the dread avalanches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When whole mountains swoop valeward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the calm thou o’erstretchest the valleys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thine arms, as if blessings imploring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an old king led forth from his palace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When his people to battle are pouring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the city beneath him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the lumberer asleep ’neath thy glooming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou dost sing of wild billows in motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he longs to be swung mid their booming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the tents of the Arabs of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whose finned isles are their cattle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the gale snatches thee for his lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mad hand crashing melody frantic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he pours forth his mighty desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leap down on the eager Atlantic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whose arms stretch to his playmate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The wild storm makes his lair in thy branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swooping thence on the continent under;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a lion, crouched close on his haunches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There awaiteth his leap the fierce thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Growling low with impatience.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spite of winter, thou keep’st thy green glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lusty father of Titans past number!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snow-flakes alone make thee hoary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nestling close to thy branches in slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And thee mantling with silence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou alone know’st the splendor of winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid thy snow-silvered, hushed precipices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing crags of green ice groan and splinter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then plunge down the muffled abysses</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the quiet of midnight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou alone know’st the glory of summer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gazing down on thy broad seas of forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy subjects that send a proud murmur</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to thee, to their sachem, who towerest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From thy bleak throne to heaven.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="si-descendero-in-infernum-ades" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Si Descendero in Infernum, Ades</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O wandering dim on the extremest edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of God’s bright providence, whose spirits sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drearily in you, like the winter sedge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shivers o’er the dead pool stiff and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thin, sad voice, when the bold wind roars by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the clear North of Duty⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still by cracked arch and broken shaft I trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That here was once a shrine and holy place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the supernal Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A child’s play-altar reared of stones and moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wilted flowers for offering laid across,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute recognition of the all-ruling Grace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How far are ye from the innocent, from those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose hearts are as a little lane serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth-heaped from wall to wall with unbroke snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or in the summer blithe with lamb-cropped green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save the one track, where naught more rude is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than the plump wain at even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing home four months’ sunshine bound in sheaves!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How far are ye from those! yet who believes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That ye can shut out heaven?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your souls partake its influence, not in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor all unconscious, as that silent lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its drift of noiseless apple-blooms receives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Looking within myself, I note how thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A plank of station, chance, or prosperous fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth fence me from the clutching waves of sin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In my own heart I find the worst man’s mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And see not dimly the smooth-hingèd gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That opes to those abysses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ye grope darkly⁠—ye who never knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On your young hearts love’s consecrating dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or felt a mother’s kisses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or home’s restraining tendrils round you curled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah, side by side with heart’s-ease in this world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fatal nightshade grows and bitter rue!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One band ye cannot break⁠—the force that clips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grasps your circles to the central light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yours is the prodigal comet’s long ellipse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Self-exiled to the farthest verge of night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet strives with you no less that inward might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No sin hath e’er imbruted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god in you the creed-dimmed eye eludes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Law brooks not to have its solitudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By bigot feet polluted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet they who watch your God-compelled return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May see your happy perihelion burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the calm sun his unfledged planets broods.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-past" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Past</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Wondrous and awful are thy silent halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O kingdom of the past!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There lie the bygone ages in their palls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Guarded by shadows vast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There all is hushed and breathless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save when some image of old error falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth worshipped once as deathless.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There sits drear Egypt, mid beleaguering sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Half woman and half beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The burnt-out torch within her mouldering hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That once lit all the East;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dotard bleared and hoary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Asser crouches o’er the blackened brands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Asia’s long-quenched glory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still as a city buried ’neath the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy courts and temples stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idle as forms on wind-waved tapestry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of saints and heroes grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy phantasms grope and shiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or watch the loose shores crumbling silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into Time’s gnawing river.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Titanic shapes with faces blank and dun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of their old godhead lorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaze on the embers of the sunken sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which they misdeem for morn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet the eternal sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their unmonarched eyes says day is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the hope of morrow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O realm of silence and of swart eclipse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The shapes that haunt thy gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make signs to us and move their withered lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Across the gulf of doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet all their sound and motion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring no more freight to us than wraiths of ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the mirage’s ocean.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And if sometimes a moaning wandereth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From out thy desolate halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If some grim shadow of thy living death</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Across our sunshine falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scares the world to error,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal life sends forth melodious breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To chase the misty terror.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy mighty clamors, wars, and world-noised deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Are silent now in dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone like a tremble of the huddling reeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Beneath some sudden gust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy forms and creeds have vanished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossed out to wither like unsightly weeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the world’s garden banished.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whatever of true life there was in thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Leaps in our age’s veins;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wield still thy bent and wrinkled empery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And shake thine idle chains;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee thy dross is clinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us thy martyrs die, thy prophets see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy poets still are singing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here, mid the bleak waves of our strife and care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Float the green Fortunate Isles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where all thy hero-spirits dwell, and share</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Our martyrdoms and toils;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The present moves attended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all of brave and excellent and fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That made the old time splendid.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-future" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Future</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O Land of Promise! from what Pisgah’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can I behold thy stretch of peaceful bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy golden harvests flowing out of sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy nestled homes and sun-illumined towers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gazing upon the sunset’s high-heaped gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its crags of opal and of chrysolite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its deeps on deeps of glory, that unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Still brightening abysses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And blazing precipices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence but a scanty leap it seems to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sometimes a glimpse is given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy more gorgeous realm, thy more unstinted blisses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Land of Quiet! to thy shore the surf</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the perturbèd Present rolls and sleeps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our storms breathe soft as June upon thy turf</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lure out blossoms; to thy bosom leaps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to a mother’s, the o’erwearied heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing far off and dim the toiling mart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hurrying feet, the curses without number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, circled with the glow Elysian</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of thine exulting vision,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of its very cares wooes charms for peace and slumber.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To thee the earth lifts up her fettered hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cries for vengeance; with a pitying smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou blessest her, and she forgets her bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her old woe-worn face a little while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows young and noble; unto thee the Oppressor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Looks, and is dumb with awe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The eternal law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which makes the crime its own blindfold redresser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadows his heart with perilous foreboding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And he can see the grim-eyed Doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From out the trembling gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its silent-footed steeds towards his palace goading.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What promises hast thou for Poets’ eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A-weary of the turmoil and the wrong!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all their hopes what overjoyed replies!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What undreamed ecstasies for blissful song!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy happy plains no war-trump’s brawling clangor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disturbs, and fools the poor to hate the poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The humble glares not on the high with anger;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love leaves no grudge at less, no greed for more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain strives Self the godlike sense to smother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the soul’s deeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">It throbs and leaps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble ’neath foul rags beholds his long-lost brother.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To thee the Martyr looketh, and his fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unlock their fangs and leave his spirit free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee the Poet mid his toil aspires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grief and hunger climb about his knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome as children; thou upholdest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lone Inventor by his demon haunted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prophet cries to thee when hearts are coldest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And gazing o’er the midnight’s bleak abyss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sees the drowsed soul awaken at thy kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stretch its happy arms and leap up disenchanted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou bringest vengeance, but so loving-kindly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The guilty thinks it pity; taught by thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce tyrants drop the scourges wherewith blindly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their own souls they were scarring; conquerors see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With horror in their hands the accursed spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That tore the meek One’s side on Calvary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from their trophies shrink with ghastly fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou, too, art the Forgiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauty of man’s soul to man revealing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The arrows from thy quiver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierce Error’s guilty heart, but only pierce for healing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, whither, whither, glory-wingèd dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From out Life’s, sweat and turmoil would ye bear me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut, gates of Fancy, on your golden gleams⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This agony of hopeless contrast spare me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fade, cheating glow, and leave me to my night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He is a coward, who would borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A charm against the present sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the vague Future’s promise of delight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As life’s alarums nearer roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The ancestral buckler calls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Self-clanging from the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the high temple of the soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where are most sorrows, there the poet’s sphere is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To feed the soul with patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To heal its desolations</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words of unshorn truth, with love that never wearies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hebe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hebe</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I saw the twinkle of white feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the flush of robes descending;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before her ran an influence fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bowed my heart like barley bending.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">As, in bare fields, the searching bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pilot to blooms beyond our finding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It led me on, by sweet degrees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy’s simple honey-cells unbinding.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Those Graces were that seemed grim Fates;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nearer love the sky leaned o’er me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The long-sought Secret’s golden gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On musical hinges swung before me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I saw the brimmed bowl in her grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilling with godhood; like a lover</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I sprang the proffered life to clasp;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beaker fell; the luck was over.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The Earth has drunk the vintage up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What boots it patch the goblet’s splinters?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can Summer fill the icy cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose treacherous crystal is but Winter’s?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O spendthrift haste! await the Gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nectar crowns the lips of Patience;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haste scatters on unthankful sods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortal gift in vain libations.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Coy Hebe flies from those that woo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shuns the hands would seize upon her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follow thy life, and she will sue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pour for thee the cup of honor.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-search" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Search</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">I went to seek for Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And Nature seemed so fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first the woods and fields my youth enticed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I was sure to find him there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The temple I forsook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And to the solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allegiance paid; but winter came and shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crown and purple from my wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His snows, like desert sands, with scornful drift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besieged the columned aisle and palace-gate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Thebes, cut deep with many a solemn rift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But epitaphed her own sepulchered state:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I remembered whom I went to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blessed blunt Winter for his counsel bleak.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Back to the world I turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For Christ, I said, is King;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the cramped alley and the hut I spurned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far beneath his sojourning:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mid power and wealth I sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But found no trace of him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the costly offerings I had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sudden rust and mould grew dim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I found his tomb, indeed, where, by their laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All must on stated days themselves imprison,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocking with bread a dead creed’s grinning jaws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Witless how long the life had thence arisen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due sacrifice to this they set apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prizing it more than Christ’s own living heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">So from my feet the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the proud World I shook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came dear Love and shared with me his crust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And half my sorrow’s burden took.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">After the World’s soft bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Its rich and dainty fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like down seemed Love’s coarse pillow to my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cheap food seemed as manna rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh-trodden prints of bare and bleeding feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned to the heedless city whence I came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by I saw, and springs of worship sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gushed from my cleft heart smitten by the same;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love looked me in the face and spake no words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But straight I knew those footprints were the Lord’s.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">I followed where they led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And in a hovel rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With naught to fence the weather from his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The King I sought for meekly stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A naked, hungry child</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Clung round his gracious knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a poor hunted slave looked up and smiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bless the smile that set him free:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New miracles I saw his presence do⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more I knew the hovel bare and poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gathered chips into a woodpile grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The broken morsel swelled to goodly store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knelt and wept: my Christ no more I seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His throne is with the outcast and the weak.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-present-crisis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Present Crisis</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When a deed is done for Freedom, through the broad earth’s aching breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs a thrill of joy prophetic, trembling on from east to west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the slave, where’er he cowers, feels the soul within him climb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the awful verge of manhood, as the energy sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a century bursts full-blossomed on the thorny stem of Time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through the walls of hut and palace shoots the instantaneous throe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the travail of the Ages wrings earth’s systems to and fro;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the birth of each new Era, with a recognizing start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nation wildly looks at nation, standing with mute lips apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glad Truth’s yet mightier man-child leaps beneath the Future’s heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the Evil’s triumph sendeth, with a terror and a chill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under continent to continent, the sense of coming ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the slave, where’er he cowers, feels his sympathies with God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hot tear-drops ebbing earthward, to be drunk up by the sod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till a corpse crawls round unburied, delving in the nobler clod.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For mankind are one in spirit, and an instinct bears along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the earth’s electric circle, the swift flash of right or wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether conscious or unconscious, yet Humanity’s vast frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through its ocean-sundered fibres feels the gush of joy or shame;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the gain or loss of one race all the rest have equal claim.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some great cause, God’s new Messiah, offering each the bloom or blight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the choice goes by forever ’twixt that darkness and that light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hast thou chosen, O my people, on whose party thou shalt stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the Doom from its worn sandals shakes the dust against our land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the cause of Evil prosper, yet ’tis Truth alone is strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, albeit she wander outcast now, I see around her throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troops of beautiful, tall angels, to enshield her from all wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Backward look across the ages and the beacon-moments see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, like peaks of some sunk continent, jut through Oblivion’s sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not an ear in court or market for the low foreboding cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those Crises, God’s stern winnowers, from whose feet earth’s chaff must fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shows the choice momentous till the judgment hath passed by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Careless seems the great Avenger; history’s pages but record</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One death-grapple in the darkness ’twixt old systems and the Word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet that scaffold sways the future, and, behind the dim unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standeth God within the shadow, keeping watch above his own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We see dimly in the Present what is small and what is great.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow of faith how weak an arm may turn the iron helm of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the soul is still oracular; amid the market’s din.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>List the ominous stern whisper from the Delphic cave within⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘They enslave their children’s children who make compromise with sin.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Slavery, the earth-born Cyclops, fellest of the giant brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons of brutish Force and Darkness, who have drenched the earth with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famished in his self-made desert, blinded by our purer day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gropes in yet unblasted regions for his miserable prey;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we guide his gory fingers where our helpless children play?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to side with Truth is noble when we share her wretched crust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere her cause bring fame and profit, and ’tis prosperous to be just;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then it is the brave man chooses, while the coward stands aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubting in his abject spirit, till his Lord is crucified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the multitude make virtue of the faith they had denied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Count me o’er earth’s chosen heroes⁠—they were souls that stood alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the men they agonized for hurled the contumelious stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood serene, and down the future saw the golden beam incline</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the side of perfect justice, mastered by their faith divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one man’s plain truth to manhood and to God’s supreme design.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the light of burning heretics Christ’s bleeding feet I track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toiling up new Calvaries ever with the cross that turns not back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these mounts of anguish number how each generation learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One new word of that grand Credo which in prophet-hearts hath burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the first man stood God-conquered with his face to heaven upturned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For Humanity sweeps onward: where to-day the martyr stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the morrow crouches Judas with the silver in his hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in front the cross stands ready and the crackling fagots burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the hooting mob of yesterday in silent awe return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glean up the scattered ashes into History’s golden urn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis as easy to be heroes as to sit the idle slaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a legendary virtue carved upon our fathers’ graves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worshippers of light ancestral make the present light a crime;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the Mayflower launched by cowards, steered by men behind their time?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn those tracks toward Past or Future that make Plymouth Rock sublime?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They were men of present valor, stalwart old iconoclasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unconvinced by axe or gibbet that all virtue was the Past’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we make their truth our falsehood, thinking that hath made us free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoarding it in mouldy parchments, while our tender spirits flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rude grasp of that great Impulse which drove them across the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They have rights who dare maintain them; we are traitors to our sires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smothering in their holy ashes Freedom’s new-lit altar-fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we make their creed our jailer? Shall we, in our haste to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tombs of the old prophets steal the funeral lamps away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light up the martyr-fagots round the prophets of to-day?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>New occasions teach new duties; Time makes ancient good uncouth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of Truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, before us gleam her camp-fires! we ourselves must Pilgrims be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly through the desperate winter sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor attempt the Future’s portal with the Past’s blood-rusted key.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="summer-storm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Summer Storm</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Untremulous in the river clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the sky’s image, hangs the imaged bridge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So still the air that I can hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slender clarion of the unseen midge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the stillness, with a gathering creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like rising wind in leaves, which now decreases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now lulls, now swells, and all the while increases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The huddling trample of a drove of sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tilts the loose planks, and then as gradually ceases</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In dust on the other side; life’s emblem deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A confused noise between two silences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finding at last in dust precarious peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wide marsh the purple-blossomed grasses</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soak up the sunshine; sleeps the brimming tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save when the wedge-shaped wake in silence passes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of some slow water-rat, whose sinuous glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wavers the sedge’s emerald shade from side to side;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But up the west, like a rock-shivered surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Climbs a great cloud edged with sun-whitened spray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge whirls of foam boil toppling o’er its verge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And falling still it seems, and yet it climbs alway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Suddenly all the sky is hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">As with the shutting of a lid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One by one great drops are falling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Doubtful and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down the pane they are crookedly crawling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the wind breathes low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slowly the circles widen on the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Widen and mingle, one and all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here and there the slenderer flowers shiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Struck by an icy rain-drop’s fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now on the hills I hear the thunder mutter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The wind is gathering in the west;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The upturned leaves first whiten and flutter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then droop to a fitful rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the stream with sluggish flap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Struggles the gull and floats away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer and nearer rolls the thunder-clap⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We shall not see the sun go down to-day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now leaps the wind on the sleepy marsh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tramples the grass with terrified feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The startled river turns leaden and harsh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You can hear the quick heart of the tempest beat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Look! look! that livid flash!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And instantly follows the rattling thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if some cloud-crag, split asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fell, splintering with a ruinous crash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Earth, which crouches in silence under;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now a solid gray wall of rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuts off the landscape, mile by mile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a breath’s space I see the blue wood again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ere the next heart-beat, the wind-hurled pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That seemed but now a league aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bursts crackling o’er the sun-parched roof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the windows the storm comes dashing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through tattered foliage the hail tears crashing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The blue lightning flashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The rapid hail clashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The white waves are tumbling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, in one baffled roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the toothless sea mumbling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A rock-bristled shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thunder is rumbling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And crashing and crumbling⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will silence return nevermore?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Hush! Still as death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The tempest holds his breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As from a sudden will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rain stops short, but from the eaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You see it drop, and hear it from the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All is so bodingly still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Again, now, now, again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plashes the rain in heavy gouts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crinkled lightning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems ever brightening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And loud and long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Again the thunder shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">His battle-song⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">One quivering flash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">One wildering crash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Followed by silence dead and dull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">As if the cloud, let go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Leapt bodily below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whelm the earth in one mad overthrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And then a total lull.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Gone, gone, so soon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No more my half-dazed fancy there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Can shape a giant In the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No more I see his streaming hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The writhing portent of his form;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The pale and quiet moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Makes her calm forehead bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the last fragments of the storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like shattered rigging from a fight at sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent and few, are drifting over me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-growth-of-the-legend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Growth of the Legend</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>A legend that grew in the forest’s hush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly as tear-drops gather and gush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a word some poet chanced to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages ago, in his careless way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings our youth back to us out of its shroud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clearly as under yon thunder-cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see that white sea-gull. It grew and grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pine-trees gathering a sombre hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it seems a mere murmur out of the vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Norwegian forests of the past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it grew itself like a true Northern pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First a little slender line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a mermaid’s green eyelash, and then anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stem that a tower might rest upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing spear-straight in the waist-deep moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its bony roots clutching around and across,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they would tear up earth’s heart in their grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the storm should uproot them or make them unclasp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its cloudy boughs singing, as suiteth the pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To snow-bearded sea-kings old songs of the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they straightened and let their staves fall to the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing waves moan again on the perilous shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vinland, perhaps, while their prow groped its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt the frothed gnashing tusks of some ship-crunching bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, pine-like, the legend grew, strong-limbed and tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the Gypsy child grows that eats crusts in the hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It sucked the whole strength of the earth and the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter, all brought it supply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas a natural growth, and stood fearlessly there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True part of the landscape as sea, land, and air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it grew in good times, ere the fashion it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To force these wild births of the woods under glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so, if ’tis told as it should be told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though ’twere sung under Venice’s moonlight of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would hear the old voice of its mother, the pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmur sealike and northern through every line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the verses should grow, self-sustained and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the vibrating stem of the melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the lithe moonlit limbs of the parent tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, the pine is the mother of legends; what food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their grim roots is left when the thousand-yeared wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dim-aisled cathedral, whose tall arches spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light, sinewy, graceful, firm-set as the wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Michael’s white shoulder, is hewn and defaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By iconoclast axes in desperate waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its wrecks seek the ocean it prophesied long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cassandra-like, crooning its mystical song?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the legends go with them⁠—even yet on the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wild virtue is left in the touch of the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sailor’s night-watches are thrilled to the core</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the lineal offspring of Odin and Thor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, wherever the pine-wood has never let in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the day of creation, the light and the din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of manifold life, but has safely conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the midnight primeval its armful of shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has kept the weird Past with its child-faith alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the hum and the stir of To-day’s busy hive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the legend takes root in the age-gathered gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its murmurous boughs for their sagas find room.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where Aroostook, far-heard, seems to sob as he goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groping down to the sea ’neath his mountainous snows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the lake’s frore Sahara of never-tracked white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the crack shoots across it, complains to the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a long, lonely moan, that leagues northward is lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the ice shrinks away from the tread of the frost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the lumberers sit by the log-fires that throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their own threatening shadows far round o’er the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the wolf howls aloof, and the wavering glare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashes out from the blackness the eyes of the bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the wood’s huge recesses, half-lighted, supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A canvas where Fancy her mad brush may try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blotting in giant Horrors that venture not down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the right-angled streets of the brisk, whitewashed town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But skulk in the depths of the measureless wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the Dark’s creeping whispers that curdle the blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the eye, glanced in dread o’er the shoulder, may dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere it shrinks to the camp-fire’s companioning gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it saw the fierce ghost of the Red Man crouch back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the shroud of the tree-trunk’s invincible black;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the old shapes crowd thick round the pine-shadowed camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shun the keen gleam of the scholarly lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the seed of the legend finds true Norland ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the border-tale’s told and the canteen flits round.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-contrast" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Contrast</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thy love thou sendest oft to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still as oft I thrust it back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy messengers I could not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In those who everything did lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The poor, the outcast and the black.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pride held his hand before mine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world with flattery stuffed mine ears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I looked to see a monarch’s guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor dreamed thy love would knock for years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor, naked, fettered, full of tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, when I sent my love to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou with a smile didst take it in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And entertain’dst it royally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though grimed with earth, with hunger thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leprous with the taint of sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now every day thy love I meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As o’er the earth it wanders wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With weary step and bleeding feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still knocking at the heart of pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And offering grace, though still denied.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="extreme-unction" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Extreme Unction</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Go! leave me, Priest; my soul would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone with the consoler, Death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far sadder eyes than thine will see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This crumbling clay yield up its breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These shrivelled hands have deeper stains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than holy oil can cleanse away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hands that have plucked the world’s coarse gains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As erst they plucked the flowers of May.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Call, if thou canst, to these gray eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some faith from youth’s traditions wrung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fruitless husk which dustward dries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath been a heart once, hath been young;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this bowed head the awful Past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once laid its consecrating hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Future in its purpose vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Paused, waiting my supreme commands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But look! whose shadows block the door?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who are those two that stand aloof?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See! on my hands this freshening gore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Writes o’er again its crimson proof!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My looked-for death-bed guests are met;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There my dead Youth doth wring its hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, with eyes that goad me yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ghost of my Ideal stands!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God bends from out the deep and says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘I gave thee the great gift of life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wast thou not called in many ways?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are not my earth and heaven at strife?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave thee of my seed to sow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bringest thou me my hundredfold?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can I look up with face aglow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And answer, ‘Father, here is gold’?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have been innocent; God knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When first this wasted life began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not grape with grape more kindly grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than I with every brother-man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now here I gasp; what lose my kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When this fast ebbing breath shall part?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What bands of love and service bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This being to a brother heart?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Christ still was wandering o’er the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a place to lay his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found free welcome at my hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shared my cup and broke my bread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, when I hear those steps sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bring the other world to this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My snake-turned nature, sunk in slime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Starts sideway with defiant hiss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon the hour when I was born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God said, ‘Another man shall be,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great Maker did not scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of himself to fashion me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sunned me with his ripening looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Heaven’s rich instincts in me grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As effortless as woodland nooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Send violets up and paint them blue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, I who now, with angry tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am exiled back to brutish clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have borne unqueached for fourscore years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A spark of the eternal God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to what end? How yield I back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trust for such high uses given?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven’s light hath but revealed a track</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby to crawl away from heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men think it is an awful sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see a soul just set adrift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On that drear voyage from whose night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ominous shadows never lift;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis more awful to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A helpless infant newly born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose little hands unconscious hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The keys of darkness and of morn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mine held them once; I flung away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those keys that might have open set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden sluices of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But clutch the keys of darkness yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear the reapers singing go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into God’s harvest; I, that might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With them have chosen, here below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grope shuddering at the gates of night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O glorious Youth, that once wast mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O high Ideal! all in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye enter at this ruined shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence worship ne’er shall rise again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bat and owl inhabit here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The snake nests in the altar-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred vessels moulder near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The image of the God is gone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-oak" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Oak</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What gnarlèd stretch, what depth of shade, is his!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There needs no crown to mark the forest’s king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How in his leaves outshines full summer’s bliss!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sun, storm, rain, dew, to him their tribute bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which he with such benignant royalty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accepts, as overpayeth what is lent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nature seems his vassal proud to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cunning only for his ornament.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How towers he, too, amid the billowed snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An unquelled exile from the summer’s throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose plain, uncinctured front more kingly shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now that the obscuring courtier leaves are flown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His boughs make music of the winter air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jewelled with sleet, like some cathedral front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where clinging snow-flakes with quaint art repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dints and furrows of time’s envious brunt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How doth his patient strength the rude March wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuade to seem glad breaths of summer breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And win the soil that fain would be unkind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To swell his revenues with proud increase!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is the gem; and all the landscape wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So doth his grandeur isolate the sense)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems but the setting, worthless all beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An empty socket, were he fallen thence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, from oft converse with life’s wintry gales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should man learn how to clasp with tougher roots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inspiring earth; how otherwise avails</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The leaf-creating sap that sunward shoots?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So every year that falls with noiseless flake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should fill old scars up on the stormward side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make hoar age revered for age’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for traditions of youth’s leafy pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, from the pinched soil of a churlish fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">True hearts compel the sap of sturdier growth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So between earth and heaven stand simply great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That these shall seem but their attendants both;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nature’s forces with obedient zeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wait on the rooted faith and oaken will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As quickly the pretender’s cheat they feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turn mad Pucks to flout and mock him still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord! all thy works are lessons; each contains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some emblem of man’s all-containing soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall he make fruitless all thy glorious pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delving within thy grace an eyeless mole?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make me the least of thy Dodona-grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cause me some message of thy truth to bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak but a word through me, nor let thy love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among my boughs disdain to perch and sing.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-royal-pedigree" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Royal Pedigree</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Let those who will claim gentle birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And take their pride in Norman blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purest ancestry on earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must find its spring in Adam’s mud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all, though noble now or base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the same level took their rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, side by side, in loving grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaped, crystal-clear, from Paradise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We are no spawn of bartered love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That’s welded to the heart with gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put on as lightly as a glove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As lightly doffed, scarce three days old⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love that marries lands to lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The passion of two title-deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That loosely rivets two cold hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And idler heirs to idlers breeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Large-limbed, the friend of sun and air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sinewy arms with labor brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glad, strong soul, that seemed to wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its human nature like a crown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was the love from which we sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A love clear-hearted as the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which through life’s toils and troubles sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a tall reaper ’mid the corn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Life lay before us bare and broad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To conquer with two hands alone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we had faith in man and God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And proudly claimed our Father’s throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We made our vassal of the Now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, from its want and woe and wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hearts rose lightly as a bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From which a bird hath soared in song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Among our sires no high-born chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freckled his hands with peasant-gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No spurred and coroneted thief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set his mailed heel upon the poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, we are come of nobler line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With larger heart within the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large heart by suffering made divine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We draw our lineage from the Oppressed:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not from the sceptred brutes who reigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from the humble souls who bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so a godlike patience gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, suffering much, could suffer more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which learned forgiveness, and the grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cometh of a bended knee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From martyrs such as these we trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our royal genealogy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There’s not a great soul gone before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That is not numbered in our clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, when the world took side with power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood boldly on the side of Man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All hero-spirits plain and grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for the Ages ope the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Labor’s dusty monarchs, stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the children of the poor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let others boast of ancestors</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who handed down some idle right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand beside their tyrant’s horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or buckle his spurs before the fight;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, too, have our ancestral claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of marching ever in the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of giving ourselves to steel and flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where aught’s to be achieved for man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And is not this a family-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worth keeping fair from age to age?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was ever such an ancestry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gold-blazoned on the herald’s page?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dear New England let us still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Maintain our race and title pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men and women of heart and will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarchs who <b>endure</b>.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="above-and-below" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Above and Below</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O dwellers in the valley-land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in deep twilight grope and cower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the slow mountain’s dial-hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shorten to noon’s triumphal hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While ye sit idle, do ye think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lord’s great work sits idle too?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That light dare not o’erleap the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of morn, because ’tis dark with you?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though yet your valleys skulk in night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In God’s ripe fields the day is cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reapers, with their sickles bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troop, singing, down the mountain-side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come up, and feel what health there is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the frank Dawn’s delighted eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, bending with a pitying kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The night-shed tears of Earth she dries!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lord wants reapers: oh, mount up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before night comes, and says, ‘Too late!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay not for taking scrip or cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master hungers while ye wait;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis from these heights alone your eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The advancing spears of day can see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That o’er the eastern hill-tops rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To break your long captivity.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lone watcher on the mountain-height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is right precious to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first long surf of climbing light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flood all the thirsty east with gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we, who in the shadow sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know also when the day is nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing thy shining forehead lit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his inspiring prophecy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hast thine office; we have ours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God lacks not early service here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what are thine eleventh hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He counts with us for morning cheer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our day, for Him, is long enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when He giveth work to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bruisèd reed is amply tough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pierce the shield of error, through.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But not the less do thou aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light’s earlier messages to preach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep back no syllable of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plunge deep the rowels of thy speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet God deems not thine aeried sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More worthy than our twilight dim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For meek Obedience, too, is Light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And following that is finding Him.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-captive" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Captive</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It was past the hour of trysting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she lingered for him still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a child, the eager streamlet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaped and laughed adown the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy to be free at twilight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From its toiling at the mill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the great moon on a sudden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ominous, and red as blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Startling as a new creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er the eastern hilltop stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casting deep and deeper shadows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the mystery of the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dread closed fast and vague about her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her thoughts turned fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her heart, if there some shelter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the silence there might be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like bare cedars leaning inland</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the blighting of the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet he came not, and the stillness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dampened round her like a tomb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could feel cold eyes of spirits</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looking on her through the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could hear the groping footsteps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of some blind, gigantic doom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Suddenly the silence wavered</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a light mist in the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a voice broke gently through it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Felt like sunshine by the blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dread, like mist in sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furled serenely from her mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Once my love, my love forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flesh or spirit, still the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I failed at time of trysting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deem then not my faith to blame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, alas, was made a captive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As from Holy Land I came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘On a green spot in the desert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gleaming like an emerald star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a palm-tree, in lone silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yearning for its mate afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Droops above a silver runnel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slender as a scimitar,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘There thou’lt find the humble postern</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the castle of my foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thy love burn clear and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strike the gateway, green and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask to enter, and the warder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surely will not say thee no.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Slept again the aspen silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But her loneliness was o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound her soul a motherly patience</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clasped its arms forevermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her heart ebbed back the sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving smooth the golden shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Donned she now the pilgrim scallop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took the pilgrim staff in hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a cloud-shade flitting eastward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wandered she o’er sea and land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her footsteps in the desert</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell like cool rain on the sand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon, beneath the palm-tree’s shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knelt she at the postern low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereat she knocked full gently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing much the warder’s no;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All her heart stood still and listened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the door swung backward slow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There she saw no surly warder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With an eye like bolt and bar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through her soul a sense of music</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throbbed, and, like a guardian Lar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the threshold stood an angel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bright and silent as a star.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fairest seemed he of God’s seraphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her spirit, lily-wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened when he turned upon her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deep welcome of his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sending upward to that sunlight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All its dew for sacrifice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then she heard a voice come onward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singing with a rapture new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Eve heard the songs in Eden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dropping earthward with the dew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well she knew the happy singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well the happy song she knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forward leaped she o’er the threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eager as a glancing surf;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell from her the spirit’s languor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell from her the body’s scurf;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the palm next day some Arabs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found a corpse upon the turf.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-birch-tree" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Birch-Tree</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Rippling through thy branches goes the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among thy leaves that palpitate forever;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ovid in thee a pining Nymph had prisoned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul once of some tremulous inland river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivering to tell her woe, but, ah! dumb, dumb forever!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While all the forest, witched with slumberous moonshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds up its leaves in happy, happy stillness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting the dew, with breath and pulse suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear afar thy whispering, gleamy islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And track thee wakeful still amid the wide-hung silence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the brink of some wood-nestled lakelet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy foliage, like the tresses of a Dryad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dripping round thy slim white stem, whose shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slopes quivering down the water’s dusky quiet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shrink’st as on her bath’s edge would some startled Naiad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou art the go-between of rustic lovers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy white bark has their secrets in its keeping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reuben writes here the happy name of Patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy lithe boughs hang murmuring and weeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above her, as she steals the mystery from thy keeping.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou art to me like my beloved maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So frankly coy, so full of trembly confidences;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shadow scarce seems shade, thy pattering leaflets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprinkle their gathered sunshine o’er my senses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nature gives me all her summer confidences.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whether my heart with hope or sorrow tremble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sympathizest still; wild and unquiet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fling me down; thy ripple, like a river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flows valleyward, where calmness is, and by it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart is floated down into the land of quiet.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-interview-with-miles-standish" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Interview with Miles Standish</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I sat one evening in my room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that sweet hour of twilight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When blended thoughts, half light, half gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throng through the spirit’s skylight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames by fits curled round the bars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or up the chimney crinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While embers dropped like falling stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the ashes tinkled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I sat, and mused; the fire burned low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, o’er my senses stealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept something of the ruddy glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bloomed on wall and ceiling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My pictures (they are very few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heads of ancient wise men)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothed down their knotted fronts, and grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As rosy as excisemen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My antique high-backed Spanish chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Felt thrills through wood and leather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That had been strangers since whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid Andaluslan heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oak that built its sturdy frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His happy arms stretched over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ox whose fortunate hide became</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bottom’s polished cover.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It came out in that famous bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That brought our sires intrepid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Capacious as another ark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For furniture decrepit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, as that saved of bird and beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pair for propagation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So has the seed of these increased</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And furnished half the nation.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Kings sit, they say, in slippery seats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But those slant precipices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ice the northern voyager meets</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less slippery are than this is;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cling therein would pass the wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of royal man or woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whatsoe’er can stay in it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is more or less than human.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I offer to all bores this perch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dear well-intentioned people</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heads as void as week-day church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tongues longer than the steeple;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To folks with missions, whose gaunt eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See golden ages rising⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salt of the earth! in what queer Guys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou’rt fond of crystallizing!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My wonder, then, was not unmixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With merciful suggestion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, as my roving eyes grew fixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the chair in question,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw its trembling arms enclose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A figure grim and rusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose doublet plain and plainer hose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were something worn and dusty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now even such men as Nature forms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Merely to fill the street with,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once turned to ghosts by hungry worms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are serious things to meet with;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your penitent spirits are no jokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though I’m not averse to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A quiet shade, even they are folks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One cares not to speak first to.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who knows, thought I, but he has come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Charon kindly ferried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell me of a mighty sum</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind my wainscot buried?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a buccaneerish air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About that garb outlandish⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just then the ghost drew up his chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, ‘My name is Standish.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘I come from Plymouth, deadly bored</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With toasts, and songs, and speeches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long and flat as my old sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As threadbare as my breeches:</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>They</i> understand us Pilgrims! they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smooth men with rosy faces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strength’s knots and gnarls all pared away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And varnish in their places!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘We had some toughness in our grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eye to rightly see us is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not just the one that lights the brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of drawing-room Tyrtæuses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>They</i> talk about their Pilgrim blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their birthright high and holy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mountain-stream that ends in mud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Methinks is melancholy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘He had stiff knees, the Puritan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That were not good at bending;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The homespun dignity of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought was worth defending;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did not, with his pinchbeck ore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His country’s shame forgotten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gild Freedom’s coffin o’er and o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When all within was rotten.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘These loud ancestral boasts of yours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How can they else than vex us?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where were your dinner orators</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When slavery grasped at Texas?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dumb on his knees was every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That now is bold as Cæsar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere pegs to hang an office on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such stalwart men as these are.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Good sir,’ I said, ‘you seem much stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sacred compromises’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Now God confound the dastard word!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My gall thereat arises:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northward it hath this sense alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you, your conscience blinding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall bow your fool’s nose to the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When slavery feels like grinding.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘ ’Tis shame to see such painted sticks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Vane’s and Winthrop’s places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see your spirit of Seventy-Six</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drag humbly in the traces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With slavery’s lash upon her back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And herds, of office-holders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shout applause, as, with a crack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It peels her patient shoulders.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘<i>We</i> forefathers to such a rout!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No, by my faith in God’s word!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half rose the ghost, and half drew out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ghost of his old broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then thrust it slowly back again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, with reverent gesture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘No, Freedom, no! blood should not stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hem of thy white vesture.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘I feel the soul in me draw near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mount of prophesying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this bleak wilderness I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A John the Baptist crying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the east I see upleap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The streaks of first forewarning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they who sowed the light shall reap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The golden sheaves of morning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Child of our travail and our woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Light in our day of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through my rapt spirit I foreknow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glory of thy morrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear great steps, that through the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Draw nigher still and nigher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And voices call like that which bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prophet come up higher.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I looked, no form mine eyes could find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I heard the red cock crowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through my window-chinks the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dismal tune was blowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought I, My neighbor Buckingham</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath somewhat in him gritty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some Pilgrim-stuff that hates all sham,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he will print my ditty.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-the-capture-of-fugitive-slaves-near-washington" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On the Capture of Fugitive Slaves Near Washington</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Look on who will in apathy, and stifle they who can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sympathies, the hopes, the words, that make man truly man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let those whose hearts are dungeoned up with interest or with ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consent to hear with quiet pulse of loathsome deeds like these!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I first drew in New England’s air, and from her hardy breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sucked in the tyrant-hating milk that will not let me rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if my words seem treason to the dullard and the tame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis but my Bay-State dialect⁠—our fathers spake the same!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shame on the costly mockery of piling stone on stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those who won our liberty, the heroes dead and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we look coldly on and see law-shielded ruffians slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who fain would win their own, the heroes of to-day!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Are we pledged to craven silence? Oh, fling it to the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parchment wall that bars us from the least of human kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes us cringe and temporize, and dumbly stand at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Pity’s burning flood of words is red-hot in the breast!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though we break our fathers’ promise, we have nobler duties first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The traitor to Humanity is the traitor most accursed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man is more than Constitutions; better rot beneath the sod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than be true to Church and State while we are doubly false to God!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We owe allegiance to the State; but deeper, truer, more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sympathies that God hath set within our spirit’s core;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our country claims our fealty; we grant it so, but then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Man made us citizens, great Nature made us men.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He’s true to God who’s true to man; wherever wrong is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the humblest and the weakest, ’neath the all-beholding sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wrong is also done to us; and they are slaves most base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose love of right is for themselves, and not for all their race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God works for all. Ye cannot hem the hope of being free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With parallels of latitude, with mountain-range or sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put golden padlocks on Truth’s lips, be callous as ye will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From soul to soul, o’er all the world, leaps one electric thrill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Chain down your slaves with ignorance, ye cannot keep apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all your craft of tyranny, the human heart from heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first the Pilgrims landed on the Bay State’s iron shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word went forth that slavery should one day be no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Out from the land of bondage ’tis decreed our slaves shall go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And signs to us are offered, as erst to Pharaoh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we are blind, their exodus, like Israel’s of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through a Red Sea is doomed to be, whose surges are of gore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis ours to save our brethren, with peace and love to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their darkened hearts from error, ere they harden it to sin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if before his duty man with listless spirit stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erelong the Great Avenger takes the work from out his hands.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-the-death-of-charles-turner-torrey" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On the Death of Charles Turner Torrey</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Woe worth the hour when it is crime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To plead the poor dumb bondman’s cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all that makes the heart sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious throbs that conquer time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are traitors to our cruel laws!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He strove among God’s suffering poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One gleam of brotherhood to send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dungeon oped its hungry door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give the truth one martyr more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then shut⁠—and here behold the end!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Mother State! when this was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No pitying throe thy bosom gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent thou saw’st the death-shroud spun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou givest to thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger’s charity⁠—a grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Must it be thus forever? No!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hand of God sows not in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long sleeps the darkling seed below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seasons come, and change, and go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the fields are deep with grain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Although our brother lie asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Man’s heart still struggles, still aspires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grave shall quiver yet, while deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the brave Bay State’s pulses leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ancient energies and fires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When hours like this the senses’ gush</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have stilled, and left the spirit room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hears amid the eternal hush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swooping pinions’ dreadful rush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bring the vengeance and the doom;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not man’s brute vengeance, such as rends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What rivets man to man apart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God doth not so bring round his ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But waits the ripened time, and sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mercy to the oppressor’s heart.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="remembered-music" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Remembered Music</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Thick-rushing, like an ocean vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bisons the far prairie shaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The notes crowd heavily and fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As surfs, one plunging while the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Draws seaward from its foamy breaking.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or in low murmurs they began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rising and rising momently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er a harp Æolian</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fitful breeze, until they ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to a sudden ecstasy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then, like minute-drops of rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ringing in water silvery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lingering dropped and dropped again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it was almost like a pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To listen when the next would be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-to-m-l" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To M. L.</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>A lily thou wast when I saw thee first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lily-bud not opened quite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hourly grew more pure and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By morning, and noontide, and evening nursed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all of nature thou hadst thy share;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou wast waited on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By the wind and sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rain and the dew for thee took care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed thou never couldst be more fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A lily thou wast when I saw thee first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lily-bud; but oh, how strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How full of wonder was the change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, ripe with all sweetness, thy full bloom burst!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How did the tears to my glad eyes start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When the woman-flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Reached its blossoming hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I saw the warm deeps of thy golden heart!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Glad death may pluck thee, but never before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gold dust of thy bloom divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath dropped from thy heart into mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To quicken its faint germs of heavenly lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no breeze comes nigh thee but carries away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Some impulses bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of fragrance and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which fall upon souls that are lone and astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plant fruitful hopes of the flower of day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-dandelion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Dandelion</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Dear common flower, that grow’st beside the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fringing the dusty road with harmless gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">First pledge of blithesome May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which children pluck, and, full of pride uphold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">High-hearted buccaneers, o’erjoyed that they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Eldorado in the grass have found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which not the rich earth’s ample round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May match in wealth, thou art more dear to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than all the prouder summer-blooms may be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Gold such as thine ne’er drew the Spanish prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the primeval hush of Indian seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor wrinkled the lean brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of age, to rob the lover’s heart of ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis the Spring’s largess, which she scatters now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rich and poor alike, with lavish hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Though most hearts never understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take it at God’s value, but pass by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The offered wealth with unrewarded eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thou art my tropics and mine Italy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look at thee unlocks a warmer clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The eyes thou givest me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are in the heart, and heed not space or time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not in mid June the golden-cuirassed bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feels a more summer-like warm ravishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the white lily’s breezy tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fragrant Sybaris, than I, when first</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the dark green thy yellow circles burst.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then think I of deep shadows on the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of meadows where in sun the cattle graze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where, as the breezes pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleaming rushes lean a thousand ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of leaves that slumber in a cloudy mass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whiten in the wind, of waters blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That from the distance sparkle through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some woodland gap, and of a sky above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where one white cloud like a stray lamb doth move.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">My childhood’s earliest thoughts are linked with thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sight of thee calls back the robin’s song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who, from the dark old tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the door, sang clearly all day long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I, secure in childish piety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened as if I heard an angel sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With news from heaven, which he could bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fresh every day to my untainted ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When birds and flowers and I were happy peers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How like a prodigal doth nature seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou, for all thy gold, so common art!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou teachest me to deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More sacredly of every human heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since each reflects in joy its scanty gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven, and could some wondrous secret show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Did we but pay the love we owe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a child’s undoubting wisdom look</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On all these living pages of God’s book.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-ghost-seer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Ghost-Seer</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ye who, passing graves by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glance not to the left or right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest a spirit should arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold and white, to freeze your eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some weak phantom, which your doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shapes upon the dark without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dark within, a guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the spirit’s deathlessness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ye entertain with fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your self-built dungeon here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ye sell your God-given lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just for gold to buy you gyves⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye without a shudder meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the city’s noonday street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirits sadder and more dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than from out the clay have fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried, beyond hope of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the body’s haunted night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See ye not that woman pale?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are bloodhounds on her trail!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bloodhounds two, all gaunt and lean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For the soul their scent is keen,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Want and Sin, and Sin is last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have followed far and fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Want gave tongue, and, at her howl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sin awakened with a growl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, poor girl! she had a right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a blessing from the light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Title-deeds to sky and earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God gave to her at her birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, before they were enjoyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poverty had made them void,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had drunk the sunshine up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all nature’s ample cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving her a first-born’s share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dregs of darkness there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often, on the sidewalk bleak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hungry, all alone, and weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has seen, in night and storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rooms o’erflow with firelight warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, outside the window-glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubled all the cold, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till each ray that on her fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stabbed her like an icicle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she almost loved the wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bloodhounds on her trail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the floor becomes her bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shall feel their pantings near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close upon her very heels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spite of all the din of wheels;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shivering on her pallet poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shall hear them at the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whine and scratch to be let in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sister bloodhounds, Want and Sin!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hark! that rustle of a dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stiff with lavish costliness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here comes one whose cheek would flush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to have her garment brush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst the girl whose fingers thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wove the weary broidery in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bending backward from her toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest her tears the silk might soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in midnights chill and murk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stitched her life into the work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaping from her bitter thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heart’s-ease and forget-me-not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Satirizing her despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the emblems woven there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little doth the wearer heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the heart-break in the brede;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hyena by her side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skulks, down-looking⁠—it is Pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He digs for her in the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lie all her claims of birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his foul paws rooting o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some long-buried ancestor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who perhaps a statue won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the ill deeds he had done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the innocent blood he shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the desolation spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over happy villages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blotting out the smile of peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There walks Judas, he who sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yesterday his Lord for gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sold God’s presence in his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a proud step in the mart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath dealt in flesh and blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bank his name is good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bank, and only there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a marketable ware.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his eyes that stealthy gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not learned of sky or stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it has the cold, hard glint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of new dollars from the mint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open now your spirit’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look through that poor clay disguise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which has thickened, day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it keeps all light at bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his soul in pitchy gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gropes about its narrow tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whose dank and slimy walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop by drop the horror falls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! a serpent lank and cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hugs his spirit fold on fold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his heart, all day and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It doth suck God’s blessed light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink it will, and drink it must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the cup holds naught but dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day long he hears it hiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writhing in its fiendish bliss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night long he sees its eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flicker with foul ecstasies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the spirit ebbs away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the absorbing clay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is he that skulks, afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the trust he has betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuddering if perchance a gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old nobleness should stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the pent, unwholesome room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where his shrunk soul cowers in gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit sad beyond the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By more Instinct for the best?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a poet who was sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a bad world’s punishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By compelling it to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden glimpses of To Be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By compelling it to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs that prove the angels near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was sent to be the tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the weak and spirit-wrung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the fiery-winged Despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In men’s shrinking eyes might flare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis our hope doth fashion us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To base use or glorious:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who might have been a lark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Truth’s morning, from the dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raining down melodious hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a freer, broader scope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspirations, prophecies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the spirit’s full sunrise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chose to be a bird of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, with eyes refusing light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hooted from some hollow tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the world’s idolatry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis his punishment to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep of eager pinions near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his own vain wings to feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drooping downward to his heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All their grace and import lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burdening his weary ghost:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever walking by his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must see his angel guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who at intervals doth turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks on him so sadly stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such ever-new surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hushed anguish in her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it seems the light of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From around him shrinks away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or drops blunted from the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built around him by his fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the mountains, whose white peaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catch the morning’s earliest streaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must see, where prophets sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning east their faces lit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence, with footsteps beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the earth, yet dim and dull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They the gladsome tidings bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sunlight’s hastening:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never can these hills of bliss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be o’erclimbed by feet like his!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But enough! Oh, do not dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the next the veil to tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven of station, trade, or dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More obscene than nakedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith plausible culture drapes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen Nature’s myriad shapes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us rather love to mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the unextingnished spark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still gleams through the thin disguise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our customs, pomps, and lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, not seldom blown to flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vindicates its ancient claim.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="studies-for-two-heads" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Studies for Two Heads</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some sort of heart I know is hers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I chanced to feel her pulse one night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brain she has that never errs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet is never nobly right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It does not leap to great results,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, in some corner out of sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspects a spot of latent blight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, o’er the impatient infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hargains, haggles, and consults.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her eye⁠—it seems a chemic test</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drops upon you like an acid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It bites you with unconscious zest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So clear and bright, so coldly placid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It holds you quietly aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It holds⁠—and yet it does not win you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It merely puts you to the proof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sorts what qualities are in you:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It smiles, but never brings you nearer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lights⁠—her nature draws not nigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but that yours is growing clearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her assays;⁠—yes, try and try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You’ll get no deeper than her eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, you are classified: she’s gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far, far away into herself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with its Latin label on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your poor components, one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are laid upon their proper shelf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her compact and ordered mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what of you is left behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no more to her than the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that clear brain, which, day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No movement of the heart e’er jostles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her friends are ranged on left and right⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, silex, hornblende, sienite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, animal remains and fossils.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And yet, O subtile analyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That canst each property detect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mood or grain, that canst untwist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each tangled skein of intellect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with thy scalpel eyes lay bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each mental nerve more fine than air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O brain exact, that in thy scales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst weigh the sun and never err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For once thy patient science fails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One problem still defies thy art;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou never canst compute for her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The distance and diameter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of any simple human heart.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hear him but speak, and you will feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shadows of the Portico</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over your tranquil spirit steal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To modulate all joy and woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To one subdued, subduing glow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above our squabbling business-hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Phidian Jove’s, his beauty lowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nature satirizes ours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A form and front of Attic grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shames the higgling market-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dwarfs our more mechanic powers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What throbbing verse can fitly render</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That face so pure, so trembling-tender?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sensation glimmers through its rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It speaks unmanacled by words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As full of motion as a nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That palpitates with unfledged birds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis likest to Bethesda’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forewarned through all its thrilling springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">White with the angel’s coming gleam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rippled with his fanning wings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hear him unfold his plots and plans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And larger destinies seem man’s;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You conjure from his glowing face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The omen of a fairer race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one grand trope he boldly spans</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gulf wherein so many fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt possible and actual;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His first swift word, talaria-shod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exuberant with conscious God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the choir of planets blots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The present earth with all its spots.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Himself unshaken as the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His words, like whirlwinds, spin on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Systems and creeds pellmell together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis strange as to a deaf man’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While trees uprooted splinter by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dumb turmoil of stormy weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Less of iconoclast than shaper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit, safe behind the reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the tornado of his speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burns calmly as a glowworm’s taper.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So great in speech, but, ah! in act</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So overrun with vermin troubles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coarse, sharp-cornered, ugly fact</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life collapses all his bubbles:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he but lived in Plato’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He might, unless my fancy errs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have shared that golden voice’s sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er barefooted philosophers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our nipping climate hardly suits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ripening of ideal fruits:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His theories vanquish us all summer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But winter makes him dumb and dumber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see him mid life’s needful things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is something painfully bewildering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seems an angel with clipt wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tied to a mortal wife and children,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by a brother seraph taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the act of eating eggs and bacon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a clear fountain, his desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exults and leaps toward the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every drop it says ‘Aspire!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving for more ideal height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the fountain, falling thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crawls baffled through the common gutter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, from his speech’s eminence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shrinks into the present tense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unkinged by foolish bread and butter.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet smile not, worldling, for in deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not all of life that’s brave and wise is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strews an ampler future’s seeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis your fault if no harvest rises;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth back the sneer; for is it naught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all he is and has is Beauty’s?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By soul the soul’s gains must be wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Actual claims our coarser thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ideal hath its higher duties.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="on-a-portrait-of-dante-by-giotto" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On a Portrait of Dante by Giotto</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Can this be thou who, lean and pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such immitigable eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst look upon those writhing souls in bale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And note each vengeance, and pass by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmoved, save when thy heart by chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast backward one forbidden glance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw Francesca, with child’s glee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Subdue and mount thy wild-horse knee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with proud hands control its fiery prance?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With half-drooped lids, and smooth, round brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And eye remote, that inly sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Beatrice’s spirit wandering now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In some sea-lulled Hesperides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou movest through the jarring street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secluded from the noise of feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her gift-blossom in thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy branch of palm from Holy Land;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No trace is here of ruin’s fiery sleet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet there is something round thy lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That prophesies the coming doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soft, gray herald-shadow ere the eclipse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Notches the perfect disk with gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A something that would banish thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thine untamed pursuer be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From men and their unworthy fates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though Florence had not shut her gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Grief had loosed her clutch and let thee free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! he who follows fearlessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beckonings of a poet-heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall wander, and without the world’s decree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A banished man in field and mart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harder than Florence’ walls the bar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which with deaf sternness holds him far</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From home and friends, till death’s release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes his only prayer for peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like thine, scarred veteran of a lifelong war!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-the-death-of-a-friends-child" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On the Death of a Friend’s Child</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Death never came so nigh to me before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor showed me his mild face: oft had I mused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of calm and peace and safe forgetfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of folded hands, closed eyes, and heart at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slumber sound beneath a flowery turf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of faults forgotten, and an inner place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept sacred for us in the heart of friends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these were idle fancies, satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the mere husk of this great mystery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dwelling in the outward shows of things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven is not mounted to on wings of dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor doth the unthankful happiness of youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aim thitherward, but floats from bloom to bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With earth’s warm patch of sunshine well content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis sorrow builds the shining ladder up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose golden rounds are our calamities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon our firm feet planting, nearer God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit climbs, and hath its eyes unsealed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>True is it that Death’s face seems stern and cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he is sent to summon those we love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all God’s angels come to us disguised;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow and sickness, poverty and death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One after other lift their frowning masks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we behold the seraph’s face beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All radiant with the glory and the calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of having looked upon the front of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With every anguish of our earthly part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit’s sight grows clearer; this was meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Jesus touched the blind man’s lids with clay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life is the jailer, Death the angel sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw the unwilling bolts and set us free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flings not ope the ivory gate of Rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the fallen spirit knocks at that⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to benigner regions beckons us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destinies of more rewarded toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hushed chamber, sitting by the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It grates on us to hear the flood of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirl rustling onward, senseless of our loss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bee hums on; around the blossomed vine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirs the light humming-bird; the cricket chirps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The locust’s shrill alarum stings the ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by, the cock shouts lustily; from farm to farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cheery brothers, telling of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answer, till far away the joyance dies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We never knew before how God had filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer air with happy living sounds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All round us seems an overplus of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the one dear heart lies cold and still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is most strange, when the great miracle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath for our sakes been done, when we have had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our inwardest experience of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When with his presence still the room expands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is awed after him, that naught is changed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Nature’s face looks unacknowledging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mad world still dances heedless on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After its butterflies, and gives no sign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis hard at first to see it all aright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain Faith blows her trump to summon back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her scattered troop: yet, through the clouded glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our own bitter tears, we learn to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undazzled on the kindness of God’s face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth is too dark, and Heaven alone shines through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is no little thing, when a fresh soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a fresh heart, with their unmeasured scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For good, not gravitating earthward yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But circling in diviner periods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are sent into the world⁠—no little thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When this unbounded possibility</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the outer silence is withdrawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, in this world, where every guiding thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ends suddenly in the one sure centre, death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The visionary hand of Might-have-been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone can fill Desire’s cup to the brim!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How changed, dear friend, are thy part and thy child’s!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bends above <i>thy</i> cradle now, or holds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His warning finger out to be thy guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art the nursling now; he watches thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow learning, one by one, the secret things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which are to him used sights of every day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smiles to see thy wondering glances con</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass and pebbles of the spirit-world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee miraculous; and he will teach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy knees their due observances of prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children are God’s apostles, day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent forth to preach of love, and hope, and peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hath thy babe his mission left undone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, at least, his going hence hath given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serener thoughts and nearer to the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opened a new fountain in my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee, my friend, and all: and oh, if Death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More near approaches meditates, and clasps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now some dearer, more reluctant hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God, strengthen thou my faith, that I may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ’tis thine angel, who, with loving haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the service of the inner shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth waken thy beloved with a kiss.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="anti-texas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Anti-Texas</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Written on Occasion of the Convention in Fanueil Hall, January 29, 1845</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O spirit of the noble Past, when the old Bay State was free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her soil was uncontaminate from Berkshire to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her sons beneath a foreign sky could answer bold and loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the land that held their fathers’ bones within her bo-som proud⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, for a moment, wake again! rise from thy ancient deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, in their waving sea-weed shrouds, are swung to dreamless sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her tawny-visaged mariners, within whatever nook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Ocean with his moaning surge in farthest seas hath shook!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Awake! arise! O, come again, called up from every sod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the moss-gray headstones cluster round the humble house of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where rest the stern old Pilgrims, each little hamlet’s pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, for the first time, sleeping with no weapon by their side!-</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, come from where the same good blood, sworn foe to slavery still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came oozing through the homespun frock on that world-famous Hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And choked his voice whose last faint prayer was for his country’s health⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From being slave or making slave God save the Com-monwealth!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, come from every battle-field, from every famous scene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where any blood for Freedom shed hath made the grass more green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, if there be one darker spot and greener than the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It marks where Pilgrim blood hath flowed from a Massa-chusetts breast!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rouse! for the Massachusetts men are crowding, one and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look at the corpse of Freedom, where she lies in Faneuil Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where she lies in her cradle stark and stiff, with death-damp on her brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though eravens would have us think her heart beat neyer so strong as now!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From clanging forge, from humming mill, from work-shop and from loom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ploughing land and ploughing sea, from student’s lonely room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re coming with the will in their eyes, the Puritan-hearted men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sound of their footsteps, the blood shall rush to Free-dom’s cheek again!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not now, as in the olden time, with braced-up hearts they come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While King Street echoes jarringly the roll of British drum;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not now prepared to grasp the sword, and snatch the firelock down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where it had hung since the old French war, with dust and cobwebs brown;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They’re coming but to speak one word, they’re coming but to say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Poor minions of the tyrant’s cause, your grovelling hearts obey!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, hear it, North, and hear it, South, and hear it, East and West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will not help you bind your slaves! In God’s name, we protest!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, though all other deeds of thine, dear Father-land, should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washed out, like writing upon sand, by Time’s encroach-ing sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That single word shall stand sublime, nor perish with the rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Though the whole world sanction slavery, in God’s name, we protest!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If hand and foot we must be bound by deeds our fathers signed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And must be cheated, gulled, and scorned because they too were blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, let them have their pound of flesh⁠—for that is in the bond⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But woe to them, if they but take a half-hair’s breadth beyond!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is water running in our veins? Do we remember still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Plymouth rock, and Lexington, and glorious Bunker Hill?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The debt we owe our fathers’ graves, and to the yet unborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose heritage ourselves must make a thing of pride or scorn?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gray Plymouth rock hath yet a tongue, and Concord is not dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And voices from our fathers’ graves and from the future come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They call on us to stand our ground, they charge us still to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not only free from chains ourselves, but foremost to make free!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If we must stand alone, what then? the honor shall be more;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we can never stand alone, while heaven still arches ster:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While there’s a God to worship, a devil to be de-nied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good and true of every age stand with us side by side!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or, if it must be, stand alone! and stronger we shall grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With every coward that deserts to join the tyrant foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let wealth and trade and empire go for what the dross is worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One man that stands for right outweighs the guilt of all the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No, if the old Bay State were sunk, and, as in days of ‘i yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One single ship within her sides the hope of Freedom bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Run up again the pine-tree flag, and on the chainless sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flag should mark, where’er it waved, an island of the free!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-falcon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Falcon</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I know a falcon swift and peerless</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As e’er was cradled In the pine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No bird had ever eye so fearless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or wing so strong as this of mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The winds not better love to pilot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cloud with molten gold o’er run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than him, a little burning islet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A star above the coming sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For with a lark’s heart he doth tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a glorious upward instinct drawn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No bee nestles deeper in the flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than he in the bursting rose of dawn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No harmless dove, no bird that singeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shudders to see him overhead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rush of his fierce swooping bringeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To innocent hearts no thrill of dread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let fraud and wrong and baseness shiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For still between them and the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The falcon Truth hangs poised forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And marks them with his vengeful eye.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-changeling" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Changeling</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I had a little daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she was given to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead me gently backward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Heavenly Father’s knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I, by the force of nature.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might in some dim wise divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The depth of his infinite patience</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this wayward soul of mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know not how others saw her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to me she was wholly fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the light of the heaven she came from</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still lingered and gleamed in her hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it was as wavy and golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as many changes took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the shadows of sun-gilt ripples</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the yellow bed of a brook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To what can I liken her smiling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon me, her kneeling lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it leaped from her lips to her eyelids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dimpled her wholly over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her outstretched hands smiled also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I almost seemed to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very heart of her mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sending sun through her veins to me!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She had been with us scarce a twelvemonth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it hardly seemed a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a troop of wandering angels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stole my little daughter away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or perhaps those heavenly Zingari</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But loosed the hampering strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they had opened her cage-door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My little bird used her wings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But they left in her stead a changeling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A little angel child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seems like her bud in full blossom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smiles as she never smiled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I wake in the morning, I see it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she always used to lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I feel as weak as a violet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone ’neath the awful sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As weak, yet as trustful also;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the whole year long I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the wonders of faithful Nature</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still worked for the love of me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winds wander, and dews drip earthward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rain falls, suns rise and set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth whirls, and all but to prosper</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A poor little violet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This child is not mine as the first was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot sing it to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot lift it up fatherly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bliss it upon my breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet it lies in my little one’s cradle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sits in my little one’s chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the light of the heaven she’s gone to</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transfigures its golden hair.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-indian-summer-reverie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Indian-Summer Reverie</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">What visionary tints the year puts on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When falling leaves falter through motionless air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or humbly cling and shiver to be gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How shimmer the low flats and pastures bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As with her nectar Hebe Autumn fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The bowl between me and those distant hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiles and shakes abroad her misty, tremulous hair!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">No more the landscape holds its wealth apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making me poorer in my poverty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But mingles with my senses and my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My own projected spirit seems to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In her own reverie the world to steep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’Tis she that waves to sympathetic sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving, as she is moved, each field and hill and tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">How fuse and mix, with what unfelt degrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clasped by the faint horizon’s languid arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Each into each, the hazy distances!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The softened season all the landscape charms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Those hills, my native village that embay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In waves of dreamier purple roll away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And floating in mirage seem all the glimmering farms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Far distant sounds the hidden chickadee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Close at my side; far distant sound the leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The fields seem fields of dream, where Memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wanders like gleaning Ruth; and as the sheaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of wheat and barley wavered in the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of Boaz as the maiden’s glow went by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So tremble and seem remote all things the sense receives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The cock’s shrill trump that tells of scattered corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passed breezily on by all his flapping mates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Faint and more faint, from barn to barn is borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Southward, perhaps to far Magellan’s Straits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Dimly I catch the throb of distant flails;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Silently overhead the hen-hawk sails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With watchful, measuring eye, and for his quarry waits.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The sobered robin, hunger-silent now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeks cedar-berries blue, his autumn cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The chipmunk, on the shingly shag-bark’s bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now saws, now lists with downward eye and ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then drops his nut, and, cheeping, with a bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whisks to his winding fastness underground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds like swans drift down the streaming atmosphere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">O’er yon bare knoll the pointed cedar shadows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drowse on the crisp, gray moss; the ploughman’s call</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Creeps faint as smoke from black, fresh-furrowed meadows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The single crow a single caw lets fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And all around me every bush and tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Says Autumn’s here, and Winter soon will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who snows his soft, white sleep and silence over all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The birch, most shy and ladylike of trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her poverty, as best she may, retrieves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And hints at her foregone gentilities</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With some saved relics of her wealth of leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The swamp-oak, with his royal purple on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Glares red as blood across the sinking sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who proudlier to a falling fortune cleaves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">He looks a sachem, in red blanket wrapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, mid some council of the sad-garbed whites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Erect and stern, in his own memories lapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With distant eye broods over other sights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sees the hushed wood the city’s flare replace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The wounded turf heal o’er the railway’s trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roams the savage Past of his undwindled rights.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The red-oak, softer-grained, yields all for lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with his crumpled foliage stiff and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">After the first betrayal of the frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rebuffs the kiss of the relenting sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The chestnuts, lavish of their long-hid gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the faint Summer, beggared now and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour back the sunshine hoarded ’neath her favoring eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The ash her purple drops forgivingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sadly, breaking not the general hush;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The maple-swamps glow like a sunset sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each leaf a ripple with its separate flush;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All round the wood’s edge creeps the skirting blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of bushes low, as when, on cloudy days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the rain fall, the cautious farmer burns his brush.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">O’er yon low wall, which guards one unkempt zone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where vines and weeds and scrub-oaks intertwine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Safe from the plough, whose rough, discordant stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is massed to one soft gray by lichens fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The tangled blackberry, crossed and recrossed, weaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A prickly network of ensanguined leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by, with coral beads, the prim black-alders shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Pillaring with flame this crumbling boundary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose loose blocks topple ’neath the ploughboy’s foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who, with each sense shut fast except the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Creeps close and scares the jay he hoped to shoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The woodbine up the elm’s straight stem aspires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Coiling it, harmless, with autumnal fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the ivy’s paler blaze the martyr oak stands mute.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Below, the Charles, a stripe of nether sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now hid by rounded apple-trees between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whose gaps the misplaced sail sweeps bellying by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now flickering golden through a woodland screen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then spreading out, at his next turn beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A silver circle like an inland pond⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slips seaward silently through marshes purple and green.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Dear marshes! vain to him the gift of sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot in their various incomes share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From every season drawn, of shade and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sees in them but levels brown and bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Each change of storm or sunshine scatters free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On them its largess of variety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Nature with cheap means still works her wonders rare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">In Spring they lie one broad expanse of green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er which the light winds run with glimmering feet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here, yellower stripes track out the creek unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, darker growths o’er hidden ditches meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And purpler stains show where the blossoms crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As if the silent shadow of a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung there becalmed, with the next breath to fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">All round, upon the river’s slippery edge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Witching to deeper calm the drowsy tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whispers and leans the breeze-entangling sedge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through emerald glooms the lingering waters slide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or, sometimes wavering, throw back the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the stiff banks in eddies melt and run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dimpling light, and with the current seem to glide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">In Summer ’tis a blithesome sight to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As, step by step, with measured swing, they pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The wide-ranked mowers wading to the knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their sharp scythes panting through the wiry grass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then, stretched beneath a rick’s shade in a ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their nooning take, while one begins to sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stave that droops and dies ’neath the close sky of brass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Meanwhile that devil-may-care, the bobolink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remembering duty, in mid-quaver stops</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Just ere he sweeps o’er rapture’s tremulous brink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ’twixt the winrows most demurely drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A decorous bird of business, who provides</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For his brown mate and fledglings six besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looks from right to left, a farmer mid his crops.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Another change subdues them in the Fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But saddens not; they still show merrier tints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Though sober russet seems to cover all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the first sunshine through their dew-drops glints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Look how the yellow clearness, streamed across,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Redeems with rarer hues the season’s loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Dawn’s feet there had touched and left their rosy prints.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Or come when sunset gives its freshened zest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lean o’er the bridge and let the ruddy thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">While the shorn sun swells down the hazy west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glow opposite;⁠—the marshes drink their fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And swoon with purple veins, then slowly fade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Through pink to brown, as eastward moves the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lengthening with stealthy creep, of Simonds’ darkening hill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Later, and yet ere Winter wholly shuts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere through the first dry snow the runner grates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the loath cart-wheel screams in slippery ruts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While firmer ice the eager boy awaits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Trying each buckle and strap beside the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And until bedtime plays with his desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twenty times putting on and off his new-bought skates;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Then, every morn, the river’s banks shine bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With smooth plate-armor, treacherous and frail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By the frost’s clinking hammers forged at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Gainst which the lances of the sun prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Giving a pretty emblem of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When guiltier arms in light shall melt away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And states shall move free-limbed, loosed from war’s cramping mail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">And now those waterfalls the ebbing river</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twice every day creates on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Tinkle, as through their fresh-sparred grots they shiver</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In grass-arched channels to the sun denied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">High flaps in sparkling blue the far-heard crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The silvered flats gleam frostily below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly drops the gull and breaks the glassy tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">But crowned in turn by vying seasons three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their winter halo hath a fuller ring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This glory seems to rest immovably⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others were too fleet and vanishing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When the hid tide is at its highest flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er marsh and stream one breathless trance of snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With brooding fulness awes and hushes everything.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The sunshine seems blown off by the bleak wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As pale as formal candles lit by day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Gropes to the sea the river dumb and blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brown ricks, snow-thatched by the storm in play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Show pearly breakers combing o’er their lee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">White crests as of some just enchanted sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Checked in their maddest leap and hanging poised midway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">But when the eastern blow, with rain aslant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From mid-sea’s prairies green and rolling plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Drives in his wallowing herds of billows gaunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the roused Charles remembers in his veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Old Ocean’s blood and snaps his gyves of frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That tyrannous silence on the shores is tost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dreary wreck, and crumbling desolation reigns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Edgewise or flat, in Druid-like device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With leaden pools between or gullies bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The blocks lie strewn, a bleak Stonehenge of ice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No life, no sound, to break the grim despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Save sullen plunge, as through the sedges stiff</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Down crackles riverward some thaw-sapped cliff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when the close-wedged fields of ice crunch here and there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">But let me turn from fancy-pictured scenes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that whose pastoral calm before me lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here nothing harsh or rugged intervenes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The early evening with her misty dyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Smooths off the ravelled edges of the nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Relieves the distant with her cooler sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tones the landscape down, and soothes the wearied eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">There gleams my native village, dear to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though higher change’s waves each day are seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whelming fields famed in boyhood’s history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sanding with houses the diminished green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">There, in red brick, which softening time defies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Stand square and stiff the Muses’ factories:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How with my life knit up is every well-known scene!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Flow on, dear river! not alone you flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To outward sight, and through your marshes wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fed from the mystic springs of long-ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your twin flows silent through my world of mind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Grow dim, dear marshes, in the evening’s gray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Before my inner sight ye stretch away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will forever, though these fleshly eyes grow blind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Beyond the hillock’s house-bespotted swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Gothic chapels house the horse and chaise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where quiet cits in Grecian temples dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Coptic tombs resound with prayer and praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where dust and mud the equal year divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">There gentle Allston lived, and wrought, and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfiguring street and shop with his illumined gaze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2"> <i>Virgilium vidi tantum</i>⁠—I have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as a boy, who looks alike on all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That misty hair, that fine Undine-like mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tremulous as down to feeling’s faintest call;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ah, dear old homestead! count it to thy fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That thither many times the Painter came;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One elm yet bears his name, a feathery tree and tall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Swiftly the present fades in memory’s glow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our only sure possession is the past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The village blacksmith died a month ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dim to me the forge’s roaring blast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Soon fire-new mediævals we shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oust the black smithy from its chestnut-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that hewn down, perhaps, the beehive green and vast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">How many times, prouder than king on throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loosed from the village school-dame’s A’s and B’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Panting have I the creaky bellows blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And watched the pent volcano’s red increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then paused to see the ponderous sledge, brought down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By that hard arm voluminous and brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the white iron swarm its golden vanishing bees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Dear native town! whose choking elms each year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With eddying dust before their time turn gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Pining for rain⁠—to me thy dust is dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It glorifies the eve of summer day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And when the westering sun half sunken burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The mote-thick air to deepest orange turns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The westward horseman rides through clouds of gold away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">So palpable, I’ve seen those unshorn few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The six old willows at the causey’s end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(Such trees Paul Potter never dreamed nor drew),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through this dry mist their checkering shadows send,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Striped, here and there, with many a long-drawn thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where streamed through leafy chinks the trembling red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past which, in one bright trail, the hangbird’s flashes blend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Yes, dearer far thy dust than all that e’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the awarded crown of victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Gilded the blown Olympic charioteer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though lightly prized the ribboned parchments three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Yet <i>collegisse juvat</i>, I am glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That here what colleging was mine I had⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It linked another tie, dear native town, with thee!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Nearer art thou than simply native earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My dust with thine concedes a deeper tie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A closer claim thy soil may well put forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Something of kindred more than sympathy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For in thy bounds I reverently laid away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That blinding anguish of forsaken clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That title I seemed to have in earth and sea and sky,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">That portion of my life more choice to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though brief, yet in itself so round and whole)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than all the imperfect residue can be;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Artist saw his statue of the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was perfect; so, with one regretful stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The earthen model into fragments broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And without her the impoverished seasons roll.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-pioneer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Pioneer</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What man would live coffined with brick and stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Imprisoned from the healing touch of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And cramped with selfish landmarks everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all before him stretches, furrowless and lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unmapped prairie none can fence or own?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What man would read and read the self-same faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, like the marbles which the windmill grinds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Rub smooth forever with the same smooth minds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This year retracing last year’s, every year’s, dull traces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When there are woods and unpenfolded spaces?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What man o’er one old thought would pore and pore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Shut like a book between its covers thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For every fool to leave his dog’s ears in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When solitude is his, and God forevermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Just for the opening of a paltry door?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What man would watch life’s oozy element</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Creep Letheward forever, when he might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Down some great river drift beyond men’s sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the undethroned forest’s royal tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broods with its hush o’er half a continent?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What man with men would push and altercate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Piecing out crooked means to crooked ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When he can have the skies and woods for friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatch back the rudder of his undismantled fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in himself be ruler, church, and state?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Cast leaves and feathers rot in last year’s nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The wingèd brood, flown thence, new dwellings plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The serf of his own Past is not a man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To change and change is life, to move and never rest;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not what we are, but what we hope, is best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The wild, free woods make no man halt or blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Cities rob men of eyes and hands and feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Patching one whole of many incomplete;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The general preys upon the individual mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And each alone is helpless as the wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Each man is some man’s servant; every soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Is by some other’s presence quite discrowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Each owes the next through all the imperfect round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not with mutual help; each man is his own goal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the whole earth must stop to pay him toll.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Here, life the undiminished man demands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">New faculties stretch out to meet new wants;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What Nature asks, that Nature also grants;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here man is lord, not drudge, of eyes and feet and hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his life is knit with hourly bands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Come out, then, from the old thoughts and old ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Before you harden to a crystal cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which the new life can shatter, but not mould;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom for you still waits, still looking backward, stays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But widens still the irretrievable space.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="longing" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Longing</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Of all the myriad moods of mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That through the soul come thronging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which one was e’er so dear, so kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So beautiful as Longing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thing we long for, that we are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one transcendent moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Present poor and bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can make its sneering comment.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still, through our paltry stir and strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glows down the wished ideal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Longing moulds in clay what Life</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Carves in the marble Real;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let the new life in, we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desire must ope the portal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps the longing to be so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Helps make the soul immortal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Longing is God’s fresh heavenward will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With our poor earthward striving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We quench it that we may be still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Content with merely living;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, would we learn that heart’s full scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which we are hourly wronging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our lives must climb from hope to hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And realize our longing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! let us hope that to our praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good God not only reckons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moments when we tread his ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the spirit beckons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That some slight good is also wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond self-satisfaction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we are simply good in thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Howe’er we fail in action.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-fable-for-critics" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Fable for Critics</h2>
			<div epub:type="introduction">
				<p>
					<span><b>Reader</b>! <i>walk up at once (it will soon be too late), and buy at a perfectly ruinous rate.</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>A Fable For Critics</b>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>or</b>, <b>Better</b>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>I like, as a thing that the reader’s first fancy may strike, an old fashioned title-page, such as presents a tabular view of the volumes contents</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>A Glance at a Few of Our Literary Progenies</b></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Mrs. Malaprop’s Word)</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>From the Tub of Diogenes</b>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>A Vocal and Musical Medley</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>That Is</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>A Series of Jokes</b></span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>By a Wonderful Quiz</b></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Who accompanies himself with a rub-a-dub-dub, full of spirit and grace, on the top of the tub.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>Set Forth In</b></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>October, the 21st day, in the year ’48.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>G. P. Putnam, Broadway</b>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It being the commonest mode of procedure, I premise a few candid remarks</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span><b>To the Reader</b>:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This trifle, begun to please only myself and my own private fancy, was laid on the shelf. But some friends, who had seen it, induced me, by dint of saying they liked it, to put it in print. That is, having come to that very conclusion, I asked their advice when ’twould make no confusion. For though (in the gentlest of ways) they had hinted it was scarce worth the while, I should doubtless have printed it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I began it, intending a Fable, a frail, slender thing, rhymeywinged, with a sting in its tail. But, by addings and alterings not previously planned, digressions chance-hatched, like birds’ eggs in the sand, and dawdlings to suit every whimsey’s demand (always freeing the bird which I held In my hand, for the two perched, perhaps out of reach, in the tree)⁠—it grew by degrees to the size which you see. I was like the old woman that carried the calf, and my neighbors, like hers, no doubt, wonder and laugh; and when, my strained arms with their grown burthen full, I call it my Fable, they call it a bull.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having scrawled at full gallop (as far as that goes) in a style that is neither good verse nor bad prose, and being a person whom nobody knows, some people will say I am rather more free with my readers than it is becoming to be, that I seem to expect them to wait on my leisure in following wherever I wander at pleasure, that, in short, I take more than a young author’s lawful ease, and laugh in a queer way so like Mephistopheles, that the Public will doubt, as they grope through my rhythm, if in truth I am making fun <i>of</i> them or <i>with</i> them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So the excellent Public is hereby assured that the sale of my book is already secured. For there is not a poet throughout the whole land but will purchase a copy or two out of hand, in the fond expectation of being amused in it, by seeing his betters cut up and abused in it. Now, I find, by a pretty exact calculation, there are something like ten thousand bards in the nation, of that special variety whom the Review and Magazine critics call <i>lofty</i> and <i>true</i>, and about thirty thousand (<i>this</i> tribe is increasing) of the kinds who are termed <i>full of promise</i> and <i>pleasing</i>. The Public will see by a glance at this schedule, that they cannot expect me to be over-sedulous about courting <i>them</i>, since it seems I have got enough fuel made sure of for boiling my pot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for such of our poets as find not their names mentioned once in my pages, with praises or blames, let them <strong>send in their cards</strong>, without further <strong>delay</strong>, to my friend G. P. <b>Putnam</b>, Esquire, in Broadway, where a <strong>list</strong> will be kept with the strictest regard to the day and the hour of receiving the card. Then, taking them up as I chance to have time (that is, if their names can be twisted in rhyme), I will honestly give each his <strong>proper position</strong>, at the rate of <strong>one author</strong> to each <strong>new edition</strong>. Thus a <strong>premium</strong> is offered sufficiently <strong>high</strong> (as the magazines say when they tell their best lie) to induce bards to <strong>club</strong> their resources and buy the balance of every edition, until they have all of them fairly been run through the mill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One word to such readers (judicious and wise) as read books with something behind the mere eyes, of whom in the country, perhaps, there are two, including myself, gentle reader, and you. All the characters sketched in this slight <i>jeu d’esprit</i>, though, it may be, they seem, here and there, rather free, and drawn from a somewhat too cynical standpoint, are <i>meant</i> to be faithful, for that is the grand point, and none but an owl would feel sore at a rub from a jester who tells you, without any subterfuge, that he sits in Diogenes’ tub.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b>A Preliminary Note to the Second Edition</b>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though it well may be reckoned, of all composition, the species at once most delightful and healthy, is a thing which an author, unless he be wealthy and willing to pay for that kind of delight, is not, in all instances, called on to write, though there are, it is said, who, their spirits to cheer, slip in a new title-page three times a year, and in this way snuff up an imaginary savor of that sweetest of dishes, the popular favor⁠—much as if a starved painter should fall to and treat the Ugolino inside to a picture of meat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You remember (if not, pray turn, backward and look) that, in writing the preface which ushered my book, I treated you, excellent Public, not merely with a cool disregard, but downright cavalierly. Now I would not take back the least thing I then said, though I thereby could butter both sides of my bread, for I never could see that an author owed aught to the people he solaced, diverted, or taught; and, as for mere fame, I have long ago learned that the persons by whom it is finally earned are those with whom <i>your</i> verdict weighed not a pin, unsustained by the higher court sitting within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I wander from what I intended to say⁠—that you have, namely, shown such a liberal way of thinking, and so much æsthetic perception of anonymous worth in the handsome reception you gave to my book, spite of some private piques (having bought the first thousand in barely two weeks), that I think, past a doubt, if you measured the phiz of yours most devotedly, Wonderful Quiz, you would find that its vertical section was shorter, by an inch and two tenths, or ’twixt that and a quarter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You have watched a child playing⁠—in those wondrous years when belief is not bound to the eyes and the ears, and the vision divine is so clear and unmarred, that each baker of pies in the dirt is a bard? Give a knife and a shingle, he fits out a fleet, and, on that little mud-puddle over the street, his fancy, in purest good faith, will make sail round the globe with a puff of his breath for a gale, will visit, in barely ten minutes, all climes, and do the Columbus-feat hundreds of times. Or, suppose the young poet fresh stored with delights from that Bible of childhood, the Arabian Nights, he will turn to a crony and cry, ‘Jack, let’s play that I am a Genius!’ Jacky straightway makes Aladdin’s lamp out of a stone, and, for hours, they enjoy each his own supernatural powers. This is all very pretty and pleasant, but then suppose our two urchins, have grown into men, and both have turned authors⁠—one says to his brother, ‘Let’s play we’re the American somethings or other⁠—say Homer or Sophocles, Goethe or Scott (only let them be big enough, no matter what). Come, you shall be Byron or Pope, which you choose: I’ll be Coleridge, and both shall write mutual reviews.’ So they both (as mere strangers) before many days send each other a cord of anonymous bays. Each piling his epithets, smiles in his sleeve to see what his friend can be made to believe; each, reading the other’s unbiased review, thinks⁠—Here’s pretty high praise, but no more than my due. Well, we laugh at them both, and yet make no great fuss when the same farce is acted to benefit us. Even I, who, it asked, scarce a month since, what Fudge meant, should have answered, the dear Public’s critical judgment, begin to think sharp-witted Horace spoke sooth when he said that the Public <i>sometimes</i> hit the truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In reading these lines, you perhaps have a vision of a person in pretty good health and condition; and yet, since I put forth my primary edition, I have been crushed, scorched, withered, used up and put down (by Smith with the cordial assistance of Brown), in all, if you put any faith in my rhymes, to the number of ninety-five several times, and, while I am writing⁠—I tremble to think of it, for I may at this moment be just on the brink of it⁠—Molybdostom, angry at being omitted, has begun a critique⁠—am I not to be pitied?[1]</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now I shall not crush <i>them</i> since, indeed, for that matter, no pressure I know of could render them flatter; nor wither, nor scorch them⁠—no action of fire could make either them or their articles drier; nor waste time in putting them down⁠—I am thinking not their own self-inflation will keep them from sinking; for there’s this contradiction about the whole bevy⁠—though without the least weight, they are awfully heavy. No, my dear honest bore, <i>surdo fabulam narras</i>, they are no more to me than a rat in the arras. I can walk with the Doctor, get facts from the Don, or draw out the Lambish quintessence of John, and feel nothing more than a half-comic sorrow, to think that they all will be lying to-morrow tossed carelessly up on the waste-paper shelves, and forgotten by all but their half-dozen selves. Once snug in my attic, my fire in a roar, I leave the whole pack of them outside the door. With Hakluyt or Purchas I wander away to the black northern seas or barbaric Cathay; get <i>fou</i> with O’Shanter, and sober me then with that builder of brick-kilnish dramas, rare Ben; snuff Herbert, as holy as a flower on a grave; with Fletcher wax tender, o’er Chapman grow brave; with Marlowe or Kyd take a fine poet-rave; in Very, most Hebrew of Saxons, find peace; with Lycidas welter on vext Irish seas; with Webster grow wild, and climb earthward again, down by mystical Browne’s Jacob’s-ladder-like brain, to that spiritual Pepys (Cotton’s version) Montaigne; find a new depth in Wordsworth, undreamed of before, that marvel, a poet divine who can bore. Or, out of my study, the scholar thrown off, Nature holds up her shield ’gainst the sneer and the scoff; the landscape, forever consoling and kind, pours her wine and her oil on the smarts of the mind. The waterfall, scattering its vanishing gems; the tall grove of hemlocks, with moss on their stems, like plashes of sunlight; the pond in the woods, where no foot but mine and the bittern’s intrudes, where pitcher-plants purple and gentians hard by recall to September the blue of June’s sky; these are all my kind neighbors, and leave me no wish to say aught to you all, my poor critics, but⁠—pish! I’ve buried the hatchet: I’m twisting an allumette out of one of you now, and relighting my calumet. In your private capacities, come when you please, I will give you my hand and a fresh pipe apiece.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I ran through the leaves of my poor little book, to take a fond author’s first tremulous look, it was quite an excitement to hunt the <i>errata</i>, sprawled in as birds’ tracks are in some kinds of strata (only these made things crookeder). Fancy an heir that a father had seen born well-featured and fair, turning suddenly wry-nosed, club-footed, squint-eyed, hair-lipped, wapper-jawed, carrot-haired, from a pride become an aversion⁠—my case was yet worse. A club-foot (by way of a change) in a verse, I might have forgiven, an <i>o</i>’s being wry, a limp in an <i>e</i>, or a cock in an <i>i</i>⁠—but to have the sweet babe of my brain served in <i>pi!</i> I am not queasy-stomached, but such a Thyestean banquet as that was quite out of the question.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the edition now issued no pains are neglected, and my verses, as orators say, stand corrected. Yet some blunders remain of the public’s own make, which I wish to correct for my personal sake. For instance, a character drawn in pure fun and condensing the traits of a dozen in one, has been, as I hear, by some persons applied to a good friend of mine, whom to stab in the side, as we walked along chatting and joking together, would not be <i>my</i> way. I can hardly tell whether a question will ever arise in which he and I should by any strange fortune agree, but meanwhile my esteem for him grows as I know him, and, though not the best judge on earth of a poem, he knows what it is he is saying and why, and is honest and fearless, two good points which I have not found so rife I can easily smother my love for them, whether on my side or t’other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my other <i>anonymi</i>, you may be sure that I know what is meant by a caricature, and what by a portrait. There <i>are</i> those who think it is capital fun to be spattering their ink on quiet, unquarrelsome folk, but the minute the game changes sides and the others begin it, they see something savage and horrible in it. As for me I respect neither women nor men for their gender, nor own any sex in a pen. I choose just to hint to some causeless unfriends that, as far as I know, there are always two ends (and one of them heaviest, too) to a staff, and two parties also to every good laugh.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">A Fable for Critics</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Phoebus, sitting one day in a laurel-tree’s shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was reminded of Daphne, of whom it was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the god being one day too warm in his wooing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took to the tree to escape his pursuing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be the cause what it might, from his offers she shrunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, Ginevra-like, shut herself up in a trunk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though ’twas a step into which he had driven her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He somehow or other had never forgiven her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her memory he nursed as a kind of a tonic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something bitter to chew when he’d play the Byronic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I can’t count the obstinate nymphs that he brought over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a strange kind of smile he put on when he thought of her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘My case is like Dido’s,’ he sometimes remarked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘When I last saw my love, she was fairly embarked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a laurel, as <i>she</i> thought⁠—but (ah, how Fate mocks!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has found it by this time a very bad box;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let hunters from me take this saw when they need it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’re not always sure of your game when you’ve treed it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just conceive such a change taking place in one’s mistress!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What romance would be left?⁠—who can flatter or kiss trees?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for mercy’s sake, how could one keep up a dialogue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a dull wooden thing that will live and will die a log⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to say that the thought would forever intrude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you’ve less chance to win her the more she is wood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! it went to my heart, and the memory still grieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see those loved graces all taking their leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those charms beyond speech, so enchanting but now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they left me forever, each making its bough!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If her tongue <i>had</i> a tang sometimes more than was right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her new bark is worse than ten times her old bite.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now, Daphne⁠—before she was happily treeified⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over all other blossoms the lily had deified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when she expected the god on a visit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(’Twas before he had made his intentions explicit),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some buds she arranged with a vast deal of care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look as if artlessly twined in her hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they seemed, as he said, when he paid his addresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the day breaking through, the long night of her tresses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So whenever he wished to be quite irresistible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a man with eight trumps in his hand at a whist-table</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I feared me at first that the rhyme was untwistable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I might have lugged in an allusion to Cristabel)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would take up a lily, and gloomily look in it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I shall at the⁠—, when they cut up my book in it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Well, here, after all the bad rhyme I’ve been spinning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve got back at last to my story’s beginning:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting there, as I say, in the shade of his mistress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dull as a volume of old Chester mysteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as those puzzling specimens which, in old histories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We read of his verses⁠—the Oracles, namely⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I wonder the Greeks should have swallowed them tamely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one might bet safely whatever he has to risk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were laid at his door by some ancient Miss Asterisk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so dull that the men who retailed them out-doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got the ill name of augurs, because they were bores⁠—)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, he mused what the animal substance or herb is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would induce a mustache, for you know he’s <i>imberbis;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he shuddered to think how his youthful position</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was assailed by the age of his son the physician;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At some poems he glanced, had been sent to him lately,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the metre and sentiment puzzled him greatly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Mehercle! I’d make such proceeding felonious⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have they all of them slept in the cave of Trophonius?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look well to your seat, ’tis like taking an airing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a corduroy road, and that out of repairing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It leads one, ’tis true, through the primitive forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grand natural features, but then one has no rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You just catch a glimpse of some ravishing distance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a jolt puts the whole of it out of existence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why not use their ears, if they happen to have any?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Here the laurel leaves murmured the name of poor Daphne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Oh, weep with me, Daphne,’ he sighed, ‘for you know it’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A terrible thing to be pestered with poets!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, alas, she is dumb, and the proverb holds good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She never will cry till she’s out of the wood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wouldn’t I give if I never had known of her?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere a kind of relief had I something to groan over:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I had but some letters of hers, now, to toss over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might turn for the nonce a Byronic philosopher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bewitch all the flats by bemoaning the loss of her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One needs something tangible, though, to begin on⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A loom, as it were, for the fancy to spin on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What boots all your grist? it can never be ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till a breeze makes the arms of the windmill go round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or, if ’tis a water-mill, alter the metaphor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say it won’t stir, save the wheel be well wet afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lug in some stuff about water “so dreamily,”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not a metaphor, though, ’tis a simile);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lily, perhaps, would set <i>my</i> mill a-going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For just at this season, I think, they are blowing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, somebody, fetch one; not very far hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re in bloom by the score, ’tis but climbing a fence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s a poet hard by, who does nothing but fill his</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole garden, from one end to t’other, with lilies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very good plan, were it not for satiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One longs for a weed here and there, for variety;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though a weed is no more than a flower in disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is seen through at once, if love give a man eyes.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now there happened to be among Phoebus’s followers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gentleman, one of the omnivorous swallowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who bolt every book that comes out of the press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the least question of larger or less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose stomachs are strong at the expense of their head⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For reading new books is like eating new bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One can bear it at first, but by gradual steps he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is brought to death’s door of a mental dyspepsy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a previous stage of existence, our Hero</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had ridden outside, with the glass below zero;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had been, ’tis a fact you may safely rely on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a very old stock a most eminent scion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stock all fresh quacks their fierce boluses ply on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stretch the new boots Earth’s unwilling to try on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom humbugs of all shapes and sorts keep their eye on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hair’s in the mortar of every new Zion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when whistles are dear, go directly and buy one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who think slavery a crime that we must not say fie on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hunt, if they e’er hunt at all, with the lion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though they hunt lions also, whenever they spy one),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who contrive to make every good fortune a wry one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at last choose the hard bed of honor to die on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pedigree, traced to earth’s earliest years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is longer than anything else but their ears⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, he was sent into life with the wrong key,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He unlocked the door, and stept forth a poor donkey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though kicked and abused by his bipedal betters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he filled no mean place in the kingdom of letters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far happier than many a literary hack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bore only paper-mill rags on his back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For It makes a vast difference which side the mill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One expends on the paper his labor and skill);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, when his soul waited a new transmigration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Destiny balanced ’twixt this and that station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not having much time to expend upon bothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembering he’d had some connection with authors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And considering his four legs had grown paralytic⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She set him on two, and he came forth a critic.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Through his babyhood no kind of pleasure he took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In any amusement but tearing a book;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him there was no intermediate stage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From babyhood up to straight-laced middle age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There were years when he didn’t wear coat-tails behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a boy he could never be rightly defined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>like the Irish Good Folk, though in length scarce a span,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the womb he came gravely, a little old man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While other boys’ trousers demanded the toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the motherly fingers on all kinds of soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red, yellow, brown, black, clayey, gravelly, loamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sat in the corner and read Viri Romæ.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never was known to unbend or to revel once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In base, marbles, hockey, or kick up the devil once;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was just one of those who excite the benevolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of your old prigs who sound the soul’s depths with a ledger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And are on the lookout for some young men to ‘edger-</span>
					<br/>
					<span>cate,’ as they call it, who won’t be too costly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who’ll afterward take to the ministry mostly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who always wear spectacles, always look bilious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always keep on good terms with each <i>mater-familias</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout the whole parish, and manage to rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten boys like themselves, on four hundred a year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, fulfilling in turn the same fearful conditions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either preach through their noses, or go upon missions.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">In this way our Hero got safely to college,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he bolted alike both his commons and knowledge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A reading-machine, always wound up and going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mastered whatever was not worth the knowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared in a gown, with black waistcoat of satin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spout such a Gothic oration in Latin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Tully could never have made out a word in it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though himself was the model the author preferred in it),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grasping the parchment which gave him in fee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the mystic and-so-forths contained in A.B.,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was launched (life is always compared to a sea)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With just enough learning, and skill for the using it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove he’d a brain, by forever confusing it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So worthy St. Benedict, piously burning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the holiest zeal against secular learning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Nesciensque scienter</i>, as writers express it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Indoctusque sapienter a Roma recessit</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’Twould be endless to tell you the things that he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each a separate fact, undeniably true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with him or each other they’d nothing to do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No power of combining, arranging, discerning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Digested the masses he learned into learning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was one thing in life he had practical knowledge for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And this, you will think, he need scarce go to college for)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a deed would he do, nor a word would he utter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he’d weighed its relations to plain bread and butter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he left Alma Mater, he practised his wits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In compiling the journals’ historical bits⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shops broken open, men falling in fits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great fortunes in England bequeathed to poor printers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cold spells, the coldest for many past winters⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, rising by industry, knack, and address,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got notices up for an unbiased press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a mind so well poised, it seemed equally made for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Applause or abuse, just which chanced to be paid for:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this point his progress was rapid and sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the post of a regular heavy reviewer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And here I must say he wrote excellent articles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Hebraical points, or the force of Greek particles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They filled up the space nothing else was prepared for,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nobody read that which nobody cared for;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any old book reached a fiftieth edition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could fill forty pages with safe erudition:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could gauge the old books by the old set of rules,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his very old nothings pleased very old fools;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But give him a new book, fresh out of the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you put him at sea without compass or chart⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His blunders aspired to the rank of an art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his lore was engraft, something foreign that grew in him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhausting the sap of the native and true in him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that when a man came with a soul that was new in him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carving new forms of truth out of Nature’s old granite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New and old at their birth, like Le Verrier’s planet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, to get a true judgment, themselves must create</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the soul of their critic the measure and weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being rather themselves a fresh standard of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To compute their own judge, and assign him his place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our reviewer would crawl all about it and round it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, reporting each circumstance just as he found it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the least malice⁠—his record would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profoundly æsthetic as that of a flea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, supping on Wordsworth, should print for our sakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recollections of nights with the Bard of the Lakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, lodged by an Arab guide, ventured to render a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comprehensive account of the ruins at Denderah.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As I said, he was never precisely unkind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The defect in his brain was just absence of mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he boasted, ’twas simply that he was self-made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A position which I, for one, never gainsaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My respect for my Maker supposing a skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his works which our Hero would answer but ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I trust that the mould which he used may be cracked, or he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made bold by success, may enlarge his phylactery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set up a kind of a man-manufactory⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An event which I shudder to think about, seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Man is a moral, accountable being.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He meant well enough, but was still in the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dunces still are, let them be where they may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed, they appear to come into existence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To impede other folks with their awkward assistance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you set up a dunce on the very North pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All alone with himself, I believe, on my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’d manage to get betwixt somebody’s shins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pitch him down bodily, all in his sins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the grave polar bears sitting round on the ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All shortening their grace, to be in for a slice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if he found nobody else there to pother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, one of his legs would just trip up the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there’s nothing we read of in torture’s inventions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a well-meaning dunce, with the best of intentions.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A terrible fellow to meet in society,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the toast that he buttered was ever so dry at tea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he’d sit at the table and stir in his sugar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crouching close for a spring, all the while, like a cougar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be sure of your facts, of your measures and weights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of your time⁠—he’s as fond as an Arab of dates;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll be telling, perhaps, in your comical way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something you’ve seen in the course of the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, just as you’re tapering out the conclusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You venture an ill-fated classic allusion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The girls have all got their laughs ready, when, whack!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cougar comes down on your thunderstruck back!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You had left out a comma⁠—your Greek’s put in joint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pointed at cost of your story’s whole point.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the course of the evening, you find chance for certain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft speeches to Anne, in the shade of the curtain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You tell her your heart can be likened to <i>one</i> flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘And that, O most charming of women, ’s the sunflower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which turns’⁠—here a clear nasal voice, to your terror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From outside the curtain, says, ‘That’s all an error.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for him, he’s⁠—no matter, he never grew tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting after a ball, with his feet on the fender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaping somebody’s sweet features out of cigar smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though he’d willingly grant you that such doings are smoke);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All women he damns with <i>mutabile semper</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if ever he felt something like love’s distemper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas tow’rds a young lady who spoke ancient Mexican,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And assisted her father in making a lexicon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I recollect hearing him get quite ferocious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About Mary Clausum, the mistress of Grotius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or something of that sort⁠—but, no more to bore ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With character-painting, I’ll turn to my story.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now, Apollo, who finds it convenient sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To get his court clear of the makers of rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <i>genus</i>, I think it is called, <i>irritabile</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every one of whom thinks himself treated most shabbily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nurses a⁠—what is it?⁠—<i>immedicabile</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which keeps him at boiling-point, hot for a quarrel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bitter as wormwood, and sourer than sorrel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any poor devil but look at a laurel;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo, I say, being sick of their rioting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though he sometimes acknowledged their verse had a quieting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Effect after dinner, and seemed to suggest a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retreat to the shrine of a tranquil siesta),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept our Hero at hand, who, by means of a bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he gave to the life, drove the rabble away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that wouldn’t do, he was sure to succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he took his review out and offered to read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, failing in plans of this milder description,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would ask for their aid to get up a subscription,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Considering that authorship wasn’t a rich craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To print the ‘American drama of Witchcraft.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Stay, I’ll read you a scene,’⁠—but he hardly began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere Apollo shrieked ‘Help!’ and the authors all ran:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once, when these purgatives acted with less spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the desperate case asked a remedy desperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drew from his pocket a foolscap epistle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As calmly as if ’twere a nine-barrelled pistol,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threatened them all with the judgment to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ‘A wandering Star’s first impressions of Rome.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Stop! stop!’ with their hands o’er their ears, screamed the Muses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘He may go off and murder himself, if he chooses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas a means self-defence only sanctioned his trying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis mere massacre now that the enemy’s flying;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he’s forced to ‘t again, and we happen to be there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give us each a large handkerchief soaked in strong ether.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I called this a ‘Fable for Critics;’ you think it’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More like a display of my rhythmical trinkets;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My plot, like an icicle’s slender and slippery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every moment more slender, and likely to slip awry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the reader unwilling <i>in loco desipere</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is free to jump over as much of my frippery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he fancies, and, if he’s a provident skipper, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May have like Odysseus control of the gales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And get safe to port, ere his patience quite fails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moreover, although ’tis a slender return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For your toil and expense, yet my paper will burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if you have manfully struggled thus far with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may e’en twist me up, and just light your cigar with me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If too angry for that, you can tear me in pieces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my <i>membra disjecta</i> consign to the breezes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fate like great Ratzau’s, whom one of those bores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who beflead with bad verses poor Louis Quatorze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Describes (the first verse somehow ends with <i>victoire</i>),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As <i>dispersant partout et ses membres et sa gloire;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if I were over-desirous of earning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A repute among noodles for classical learning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could pick you a score of allusions, i-wis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As new as the jests of <i>Didaskalos ’tis;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better still, I could make out a good solid list</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From authors recondite who do not exist⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that would be naughty: at least, I could twist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something out of Absyrtus, or turn your inquiries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After Milton’s prose metaphor, drawn from Osiris;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as Cicero says he won’t say this or that</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A fetch, I must say, most transparent and flat),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After saying whate’er he could possibly think of⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I simply will state that I pause on the brink of</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mire, ankle-deep, of deliberate confusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made up of old jumbles of classic allusion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, when you were thinking yourselves to be pitied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just conceive how much harder your teeth you’d have gritted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ’twere not for the dulness I’ve kindly omitted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I’d apologize here for my many digressions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it not that I’m certain to trip into fresh ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(’Tis so hard to escape if you get in their mesh once);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just reflect, if you please, how ’tis said by Horatius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Mæonides nods now and then, and, my gracious!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It certainly does look a little bit ominous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he gets under way with <i>ton d’apameibomenos</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Here a something occurs which I’ll just clap a rhyme to,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say it myself, ere a Zoilus have time to⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any author a nap like Van Winkle’s may take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he only contrive to keep readers awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he’ll very soon find himself laid on the shelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If <i>they</i> fall a-nodding when he nods himself.)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Once for all, to return, and to stay, will I, nill I⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Phoebus expressed his desire for a lily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Hero, whose homoeopathic sagacity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an ocean of zeal mixed his drop of capacity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set off for the garden as fast as the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or, to take a comparison more to my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a sound politician leaves conscience behind).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaped the low fence, as a party hack jumps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er his principles, when something else turns up trumps.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He was gone a long time, and Apollo, meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went over some sonnets of his with a file,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, of all compositions, he thought that the sonnet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Best repaid all the toil you expended upon it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It should reach with one impulse the end of its course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for one final blow collect all of its force;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a verse should be salient, but each one should tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a wave-like up-gathering to break at the end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, condensing the strength here, there smoothing a wry kink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was killing the time, when up walked Mr. D⁠⸺,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a few steps behind him, a small man in glasses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went dodging about, muttering, ‘Murderers! asses!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out of his pocket a paper he’d take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a proud look of martyrdom tied to its stake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, reading a squib at himself, he’d say, ‘Here I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst American letters a bloody conspiracy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are all by my personal enemies written;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must post an anonymous letter to Britain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show that this gall is the merest suggestion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of spite at my zeal on the Copyright question,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, on this side the water, ’tis prudent to pull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the eyes of the public their national wool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By accusing of slavish respect to John Bull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All American authors who have more or less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that anti-American humbug⁠—success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While in private we’re always embracing the knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some twopenny editor over the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And licking his critical shoes, for you know ’tis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole aim of our lives to get one English notice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My American puffs I would willingly burn all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(They’re all from one source, monthly, weekly, diurnal)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To get but a kick from a transmarine journal!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So, culling the gibes of each critical scorner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if they were plums, and himself were Jack Horner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He came cautiously on, peeping round every corner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into each hole where a weasel might pass in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expecting the knife of some critic assassin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stabs to the heart with a caricature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so bad as those daubs of the Sun, to be sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet done with a dagger-o’-type, whose vile portraits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disperse all one’s good and condense all one’s poor traits.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Apollo looked up, hearing footsteps approaching,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slipped out of sight the new rhymes he was broaching⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Good day, Mr. D⁠⸺, I’m happy to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a scholar so ripe, and a critic so neat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who through Grub Street the soul of a gentleman carries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What news from that suburb of London and Paris</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which latterly makes such shrill claims to monopolize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The credit of being the New World’s metropolis?’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Why, nothing of consequence, save this attack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On my friend there, behind, by some pitiful hack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thinks every national author a poor one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That isn’t a copy of something that’s foreign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And assaults the American Dick⁠—’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Nay, ’tis clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That your Damon there’s fond of a flea in his ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if no one else furnished them gratis, on tick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would buy some himself, just to hear the old click;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, I honestly think, if some fool in Japan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should turn up his nose at the “Poems on Man,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which contain many verses as fine, by the bye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any that lately came under my eye,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your friend there by some inward instinct would know it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would get it translated, reprinted, and show it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a man might take off a high stock to exhibit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The autograph round his own neck of the gibbet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would let it rest so, but fire column after column,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Signed Cato, or Brutus, or something as solemn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By way of displaying his critical crosses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tweaking that poor transatlantic proboscis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His broadsides resulting (this last there’s no doubt of)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In successively sinking the craft they’re fired out of.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now nobody knows when an author is hit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he have not a public hysterical fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him only keep close in his snug garret’s dim ether,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nobody’d think of his foes⁠—or of him either;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If an author have any least fibre of worth in him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abuse would but tickle the organ of mirth in him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the critics on earth cannot crush with their ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One word that’s in tune with the nature of man.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Well, perhaps so; meanwhile I have brought you a book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into which if you’ll just have the goodness to look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may feel so delighted (when once you are through it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to deem it not unworth your while to review it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I think I can promise your thoughts, if you do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A place in the next Democratic Review.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘The most thankless of gods you must surely have thought me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this is the forty-fourth copy you’ve brought me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have given them away, or at least I have tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I’ve forty-two left, standing all side by side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The man who accepted that one copy died)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From one end of a shelf to the other they reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“With the author’s respects” neatly written in each.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The publisher, sure, will proclaim a Te Deum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he hears of that order the British Museum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has sent for one set of what books were first printed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In America, little or big⁠—for ’tis hinted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That this is the first truly tangible hope he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has ever had raised for the sale of a copy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve thought very often ’twould be a good thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all public collections of books, if a wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were set off by itself, like the seas from the dry lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marked <i>Literature suited to desolate islands</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And filled with such books as could never be read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save by readers of proofs, forced to do it for bread⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such books as one’s wrecked on in small country taverns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as hermits might mortify over in caverns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Satan, if printing had then been invented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the climax of woe, would to Job have presented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Crusoe might dip in, although there are few so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outrageously cornered by fate as poor Crusoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since the philanthropists just now are banging</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gibbeting all who’re in favor of hanging</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though Cheever has proved that the Bible and Altar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were let down from Heaven at the end of a halter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that vital religion would dull and grow callous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unrefreshed, now and then, with a sniff of the gallows)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And folks are beginning to think it looks odd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To choke a poor scamp for the glory of God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that He who esteems the Virginia reel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bait to draw saints from their spiritual weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And regards the quadrille as a far greater knavery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than crushing his African children with slavery⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since all who take part in a waltz or cotillon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are mounted for hell on the Devil’s own pillion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, as every true orthodox Christian well knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approaches the heart through the door of the toes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That He, I was saying, whose judgments are stored</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such as take steps in despite of his word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should look with delight on the agonized prancing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a wretch who has not the least ground for his dancing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the State, standing by, sings a verse from the Psalter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About offering to God on his favorite halter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when the legs droop from their twitching divergence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sells the clothes to a Jew, and the corpse to the surgeons;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, instead of all this, I think I can direct you all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a criminal code both humane and effectual;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I propose to shut up every doer of wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these desperate books, for such term, short or long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, by statute in such cases made and provided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be by your wise legislators decided:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus: Let murderers be shut, to grow wiser and cooler,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At hard labor for life on the works of Miss⁠—;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Petty thieves, kept from flagranter crimes by their fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall peruse Yankee Doodle a blank term of years⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That American Punch, like the English, no doubt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just the sugar and lemons and spirit left out.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘But stay, here comes Tityrus Griswold, and leads on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flocks whom he first plucks alive, and then feeds on⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A loud-cackling swarm, in whose leathers warm drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He goes for as perfect a⁠—swan as the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There comes Emerson first, whose rich words, every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are like gold nails in temples to hang trophies on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose prose is grand verse, while his verse, the Lord knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is some of it pr⁠—No, ’tis not even prose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m speaking of metres; some poems have welled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those rare depths of soul that have ne’er been excelled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re not epics, but that doesn’t matter a pin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In creating, the only hard thing’s to begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grass-blade’s no easier to make than an oak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you’ve once found the way, you’ve achieved the grand stroke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the worst of his poems are mines of rich matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thrown in a heap with a crash and a clatter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now it is not one thing nor another alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes a poem, but rather the general tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The something pervading, uniting the whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The before unconceived, unconceivable soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that just in removing this trifle or that, you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take away, as it were, a chief limb of the statue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roots, wood, bark, and leaves singly perfect may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, clapt hodge-podge together, they don’t make a tree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘But, to come back to Emerson (whom, by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I believe we left waiting)⁠—his is, we may say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Greek head on right Yankee shoulders, whose range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has Olympus for one pole, for t’other the Exchange;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seems, to my thinking (although I’m afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comparison must, long ere this, have been made),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Plotinus-Montaigne, where the Egyptian’s gold mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Gascon’s shrewd wit cheek-by-jowl coexist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All admire, and yet scarcely six converts he’s got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To I don’t (nor they either) exactly know what;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though he builds glorious temples, ’tis odd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaves never a doorway to get in a god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis refreshing to old-fashioned people like me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet such a primitive Pagan as he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose mind all creation is duly respected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As parts of himself⁠—just a little projected;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who’s willing to worship the stars and the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A convert to⁠—nothing but Emerson.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So perfect a balance there is in his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he talks of things sometimes as if they were dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life, nature, love, God, and affairs of that sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looks at as merely ideas; in short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if they were fossils stuck round in a cabinet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such vast extent that our earth’s a mere dab in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Composed just as he is inclined to conjecture her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Namely, one part pure earth, ninety-nine parts pure lecturer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You are filled with delight at his clear demonstration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each figure, word, gesture, just fits the occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the quiet precision of science he’ll sort ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you can’t help suspecting the whole a <i>post mortem</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There are persons, mole-blind to the soul’s make and style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who insist on a likeness ’twixt him and Carlyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To compare him with Plato would be vastly fairer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carlyle’s the more burly, but E. is the rarer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sees fewer objects, but clearlier, truelier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If C.’s as original, E.’s more peculiar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he’s more of a man you might say of the one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the other he’s more of an Emerson;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>C.’s the Titan, as shaggy of mind as of limb⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E. the clear-eyed Olympian, rapid and slim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one’s two thirds Norseman, the other half Greek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the one’s most abounding, the other’s to seek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>C.’s generals require to be seen in the mass⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E.’s specialties gain if enlarged by the glass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>C. gives nature and God his own fits of the blues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rims common-sense things with mystical hues⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E. sits in a mystery calm and intense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looks coolly around him with sharp common-sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>C. shows you how every-day matters unite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the dim transdiurnal recesses of night⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While E., in a plain, preternatural way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes mysteries matters of mere every day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>C. draws all his characters quite <i>à la</i> Fuseli⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not sketching their bundles of muscles and thews illy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paints with a brush so untamed and profuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seem nothing but bundles of muscles and thews;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E. is rather like Flaxman, lines strait and severe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a colorless outline, but full, round, and clear;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the men he thinks worthy he frankly accords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The design of a white marble statue in words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>C. labors to get at the centre, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take a reckoning from there of his actions and men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E. calmly assumes the said centre as granted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, given himself, has whatever is wanted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘He has imitators in scores, who omit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No part of the man but his wisdom and wit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who go carefully o’er the sky-blue of his brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he has skimmed it once, skim it again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If at all they resemble him, you may be sure it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because their shoals mirror his mists and obscurities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a mud-puddle seems deep as heaven for a minute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While a cloud that floats o’er is reflected within it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There comes⁠—, for instance; to see him’s rare sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tread in Emerson’s tracks with legs painfully short;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he jumps, how he strains, and gets red in the face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep step with the mystagogue’s natural pace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He follows as close as a stick to a rocket,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fingers exploring the prophet’s each pocket.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fie, for shame, brother bard; with good fruit of your own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can’t you let Neighbor Emerson’s orchards alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, ’tis no use, you’ll not find e’en a core⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>⸻ has picked up all the windfalls before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They might strip every tree, and E. never would catch ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Hesperides have no rude dragon to watch ’em;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they send him a dishful, and ask him to try ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never suspects how the sly rogues came by ’em;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wonders why ’tis there are none such his trees on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thinks ’em the best he has tasted this season.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Yonder, calm as a cloud, Alcott stalks in a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fancies himself in thy groves, Academe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the Parthenon nigh, and the olive-trees o’er him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never a fact to perplex him or bore him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a snug room at Plato’s when night comes, to walk to,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And people from morning till midnight to talk to,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from midnight till morning, nor snore in their listening;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he muses, his face with the joy of it glistening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his highest conceit of a happiest state is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they’d live upon acorns, and hear him talk gratis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And indeed, I believe, no man ever talked better⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each sentence hangs perfectly poised to a letter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seems piling words, but there’s royal dust hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the heart of each sky-piercing pyramid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he talks he is great, but goes out like a taper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you shut him up closely with pen, ink, and paper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet his fingers itch for ’em from morning till night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he thinks he does wrong if he don’t always write;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this, as in all things, a lamb among men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He goes to sure death when he goes to his pen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Close behind him is Brownson, his mouth very full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With attempting to gulp a Gregorian bull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who contrives, spite of that, to pour out as he goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream of transparent and forcible prose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shifts quite about, then proceeds to expound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ’tis merely the earth, not himself, that turns round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wishes it clearly impressed on your mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the weathercock rules and not follows the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proving first, then as deftly confuting each side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With no doctrine pleased that’s not somewhere denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lays the denier away on the shelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then⁠—down beside him lies gravely himself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s the Salt River boatman, who always stands willing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To convey friend or foe without charging a shilling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so fond of the trip that, when leisure’s to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll row himself up, if he can’t get a fare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worst of it is, that his logic’s so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of two sides he commonly chooses the wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If there is only one, why, he’ll split it in two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first pummel this half, then that, black and blue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That white’s white needs no proof, but it takes a deep fellow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove it jet-black, and that jet-black is yellow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He offers the true faith to drink in a sieve⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it reaches your lips there’s naught left to believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a few silly-(syllo-, I mean,)-gisms that squat ’em</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like tadpoles, o’erjoyed with the mud at the bottom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There is Willis, all <i>natty</i> and jaunty and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who says his best things in so foppish a way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With conceits and pet phrases so thickly o’erlaying ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one hardly knows whether to thank him for saying ’em;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over-ornament ruins both poem and prose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just conceive of a Muse with a ring in her nose!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His prose had a natural grace of its own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And enough of it, too, if he’d let it alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he twitches and jerks so, one fairly gets tired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is forced to forgive where one might have admired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet whenever it slips away free and unlaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It runs like a stream with a musical waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gurgles along with the liquidest sweep;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not deep as a river, but who’d have it deep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a country where scarcely a village is found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That has not its author sublime and profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some one to be slightly shallow’s a duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Willis’s shallowness makes half his beauty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His prose winds along with a blithe, gurgling error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reflects all of Heaven it can see in its mirror:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a narrowish strip, but it is not an artifice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the true out-of-doors with its genuine hearty phiz;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is Nature herself, and there’s something in that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since most brains reflect but the crown of a hat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few volumes I know to read under a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More truly delightful than his A l’Abri,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the shadows of leaves flowing over your book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like ripple-shades netting the bed of a brook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With June coming softly your shoulder to look over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breezes waiting to turn every leaf of your book over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nature to criticise still as you read⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The page that bears that is a rare one indeed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘He’s so innate a cockney, that had he been born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where plain bare-skin’s the only full-dress that is worn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’d have given his own such an air that you’d say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T had been made by a tailor to lounge in Broadway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nature’s a glass of champagne with the foam on ‘t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As tender as Fletcher, as witty as Beaumont;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So his best things are done in the flush of the moment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he wait, all is spoiled; he may stir it and shake it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, the fixed air once gone, he can never re-make it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might be a marvel of easy delightfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he would not sometimes leave the <i>r</i> out of sprightfulness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he ought to let Scripture alone⁠—’tis self-slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nobody likes inspiration-and-water.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’d have been just the fellow to sup at the Mermaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cracking jokes at rare Ben, with an eye to the barmaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wit running up as Canary ran down⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The topmost bright bubble on the wave of The Town.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Here comes Parker, the Orson of parsons, a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom the Church undertook to put under her ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The Church of Socinus, I mean)⁠—his opinions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being So-(ultra)-cinian, they shocked the Socinians:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They believed⁠—faith, I’m puzzled⁠—I think I may call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their belief a believing in nothing at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or something of that sort; I know they all went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a general union of total dissent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went a step farther; without cough or hem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He frankly avowed he believed not in them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, before he could be jumbled up or prevented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their orthodox kind of dissent he dissented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was heresy here, you perceive, for the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of privately judging means simply that light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been granted to <i>me</i>, for deciding on <i>you;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in happier times, before Atheism grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deed contained clauses for cooking you too:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now at Xerxes and Knut we all laugh, yet our foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the same wave is wet that mocked Xerxes and Knut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we all entertain a secure private notion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That our <i>Thus far!</i> will have a great weight with the ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas so with our liberal Christians: they bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sincerest conviction their chairs to the shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They brandished their worn theological birches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bade natural progress keep out of the Churches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And expected the lines they had drawn to prevail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the fast-rising tide to keep out of their pale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had formerly dammed the Pontifical See,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the same thing, they thought, would do nicely for P.;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he turned up his nose at their mumming and shamming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cared (shall I say?) not a d⁠⸺ for their damming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they first read him out of their church, and next minute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turned round and declared he had never been in it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the ban was too small or the man was too big,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he recks not their bells, books, and candles a fig</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He scarce looks like a man who would <i>stay</i> treated shabbily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sophroniscus’ son’s head o’er the features of Rabelais);⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bangs and bethwacks them⁠—their backs he salutes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the whole tree of knowledge torn up by the roots;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sermons with satire are plenteously verjuiced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he talks in one breath of Confutzee, Cass, Zerduscht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jack Robinson, Peter the Hermit, Strap, Dathan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cush, Pitt (not the bottomless, <i>that</i> he’s no faith in),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pan, Pillicock, Shakespeare, Paul, Toots, Monsieur Tonson,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aldebaran, Alcander, Ben Khorat, Ben Jonson,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoth, Richter, Joe Smith, Father Paul, Judah Monis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Musæus, Muretus, <i>hem</i>⁠—[Greek: m] Scorpionis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maccabee, Maccaboy, Mac⁠—Mac⁠—ah! Machiavelli,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Condorcet, Count d’Orsay, Conder, Say, Ganganelli,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orion, O’Connell, the Chevalier D’O,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(See the Memoirs of Sully,) [Greek: to pan], the great toe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the statue of Jupiter, now made to pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that of Jew Peter by good Romish brass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(You may add for yourselves, for I find it a bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the names you have ever, or not, heard before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when you’ve done that⁠—why, invent a few more).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hearers can’t tell you on Sunday beforehand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in that day’s discourse they’ll be Bibled or Koraned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he’s seized the idea (by his martyrdom fired)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all men (not orthodox) <i>may be</i> inspired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet though wisdom profane with his creed he may weave in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He makes it quite clear what he <i>doesn’t</i> believe in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While some, who decry him, think all Kingdom Come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a sort of a, kind of a, species of Hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which, as it were, so to speak, not a crumb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would be left, if we didn’t keep carefully mum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to make a clean breast, that ’tis perfectly plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That <i>all</i> kinds of wisdom are somewhat profane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now P.’s creed than this may be lighter or darker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in one thing, ’tis clear, he has faith, namely⁠—Parker;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is what makes him the crowd-drawing preacher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s a background of god to each hard-working feature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every word that he speaks has been fierily furnaced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the blast of a life that has struggled in earnest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he stands, looking more like a ploughman than priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not dreadfully awkward, not graceful at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gestures all downright and same, if you will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of brown-fisted Hobnail in hoeing a drill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his periods fall on you, stroke after stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the blows of a lumberer felling an oak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You forget the man wholly, you’re thankful to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a preacher who smacks of the field and the street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to hear, you’re not over-particular whence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost Taylor’s profusion, quite Latimer’s sense.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There is Bryant, as quiet, as cool, and as dignified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a smooth, silent iceberg, that never is ignified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save when by reflection ’tis kindled o’ nights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a semblance of flame by the chill Northern Lights.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may rank (Griswold says so) first bard of your nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(There’s no doubt that he stands in supreme iceolation),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your topmost Parnassus he may set his heel on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no warm applauses come, peal following peal on⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s too smooth and too polished to hang any zeal on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unqualified merits, I’ll grant, if you choose, he has ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he lacks the one merit of kindling enthusiasm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he stir you at all, it is just, on my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like being stirred up with the very North Pole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘He is very nice reading in summer, but <i>inter</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Nos</i>, we don’t want <i>extra</i> freezing in winter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take him up in the depth of July, my advice is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you feel an Egyptian devotion to ices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, deduct all you can, there’s enough that’s right good in him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has a true soul for field, river, and wood in him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his heart, in the midst of brick walls, or where’er it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glows, softens, and thrills with the tenderest charities⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you mortals that delve in this trade-ridden planet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, to old Berkshire’s hills, with their limestone and granite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you’re one who <i>in loco</i> (add <i>foco</i> here) <i>desipis</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You will get out of his outermost heart (as I guess) a piece;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you’d get deeper down if you came as a precipice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would break the last seal of its inwardest fountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you only could palm yourself off for a mountain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mr. Quivis, or somebody quite as discerning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some scholar who’s hourly expecting his learning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calls B. the American Wordsworth; but Wordsworth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be rated at more than your whole tuneful herd’s worth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, don’t be absurd, he’s an excellent Bryant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, my friends, you’ll endanger the life of your client,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By attempting to stretch him up into a giant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you choose to compare him, I think there are two per-</span>
					<br/>
					<span>-sons fit for a parallel⁠—Thomson and Cowper;[2]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I don’t mean exactly⁠—there’s something of each,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s T.’s love of nature, C.’s penchant to preach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just mix up their minds so that C.’s spice of craziness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall balance and neutralize T.’s turn for laziness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it gives you a brain cool, quite frictionless, quiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose internal police nips the buds of all riot⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brain like a permanent strait-jacket put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart that strives vainly to burst off a button⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brain which, without being slow or mechanic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does more than a larger less drilled, more volcanic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s a Cowper condensed, with no craziness bitten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the advantage that Wordsworth before him had written.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘But, my dear little bardlings, don’t prick up your ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor suppose I would rank you and Bryant as peers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I call him an iceberg, I don’t mean to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is nothing in that which is grand in its way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is almost the one of your poets that knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How much grace, strength, and dignity lie in Repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he sometimes fall short, he is too wise to mar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His thought’s modest fulness by going too far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T would be well if your authors should all make a trial</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what virtue there is in severe self-denial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And measure their writings by Hesiod’s staff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which teaches that all has less value than half.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There is Whittier, whose swelling and vehement heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strains the strait-breasted drab of the Quaker apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reveals the live Man, still supreme and erect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath the bemummying wrappers of sect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was ne’er a man born who had more of the swing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the true lyric bard and all that kind of thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his failures arise (though he seem not to know it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the very same cause that has made him a poet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fervor of mind which knows no separation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt simple excitement and pure inspiration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As my Pythoness erst sometimes erred from not knowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’twere I or mere wind through her tripod was blowing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let his mind once get head in its favorite direction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the torrent of verse bursts the dams of reflection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, borne with the rush of the metre along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet may chance to go right or go wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content with the whirl and delirium of song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then his grammar’s not always correct, nor his rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he’s prone to repeat his own lyrics sometimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not his best, though, for those are struck off at white-heats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the heart in his breast like a trip-hammer beats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can ne’er be repeated again any more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than they could have been carefully plotted before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like old what’s-his-name there at the battle of Hastings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Who, however, gave more than mere rhythmical bastings),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Quaker leads off metaphorical fights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For reform and whatever they call human rights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both singing and striking in front of the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hitting his foes with the mallet of Thor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Anne haec</i>, one exclaims, on beholding his knocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Vestis filii tui</i>, O leather-clad Fox?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can that be thy son, in the battle’s mid din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preaching brotherly love and then driving it in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the brain of the tough old Goliath of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the smoothest of pebbles from Castaly’s spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impressed on his hard moral sense with a sling?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘All honor and praise to the right-hearted bard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was true to The Voice when such service was hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who himself was so free he dared sing for the slave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to look but a protest in silence was brave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All honor and praise to the women and men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who spoke out for the dumb and the down-trodden then!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It needs not to name them, already for each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see History preparing the statue and niche;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were harsh, but shall <i>you</i> be so shocked at hard words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who have beaten your pruning-hooks up into swords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose rewards and hurrahs men are surer to gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the reaping of men and of women than grain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should <i>you</i> stand aghast at their fierce wordy war, if</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You scalp one another for Bank or for Tariff?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your calling them cut-throats and knaves all day long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doesn’t prove that the use of hard language is wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the World’s heart beats quicker to think of such men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As signed Tyranny’s doom with a bloody steel-pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While on Fourth-of-Julys beardless orators fright one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hints at Harmodius and Aristogeiton,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You need not look shy at your sisters and brothers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stab with sharp words for the freedom of others;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, a wreath, twine a wreath for the loyal and true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, for sake of the many, dared stand with the few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of blood-spattered laurel for enemies braved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of broad, peaceful oak-leaves for citizens saved!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Here comes Dana, abstractedly loitering along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Involved in a paulo-post-future of song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who’ll be going to write what’ll never be written</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the Muse, ere he think of it, gives him the mitten⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is so well aware of how things should be done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his own works displease him before they’re begun⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who so well all that makes up good poetry knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the best of his poems is written in prose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All saddled and bridled stood Pegasus waiting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was booted and spurred, but he loitered debating;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a very grave question his soul was immersed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which foot in the stirrup he ought to put first:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while this point and that he judicially dwelt on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, somehow or other, had written Paul Felton,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose beauties or faults, whichsoever you see there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll allow only genius could hit upon either.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he once was the Idle Man none will deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I fear he will never be anything more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ocean of song heaves and glitters before him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The depth and the vastness and longing sweep o’er him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows every breaker and shoal on the chart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has the Coast Pilot and so on by heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he spends his whole life, like the man in the fable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In learning to swim on his library table.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There swaggers John Neal, who has wasted in Maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sinews and cords of his pugilist brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who might have been poet, but that, in its stead, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preferred to believe that he was so already;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too hasty to wait till Art’s ripe fruit should drop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must pelt down an unripe and colicky crop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who took to the law, and had this sterling plea for it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It required him to quarrel, and paid him a fee for it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man who’s made less than he might have, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He always has thought himself more than he was⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, with very good natural gifts as a bard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke the strings of his lyre out by striking too hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cracked half the notes of a truly fine voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because song drew less instant attention than noise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, men do not know how much strength is in poise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he goes the farthest who goes far enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that all beyond that is just bother and stuff.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No vain man matures, he makes too much new wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His blooms are too thick for the fruit to be good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the modest man ripens, ’tis he that achieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just what’s needed of sunshine and shade he receives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grapes, to mellow, require the cool dark of their leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neal wants balance; he throws his mind always too far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisking out flocks of comets, but never a star;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has so much muscle, and loves so to show it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he strips himself naked to prove he’s a poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to show he could leap Art’s wide ditch, if he tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jumps clean o’er it, and into the hedge t’other side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has strength, but there’s nothing about him in keeping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One gets surelier onward by walking than leaping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has used his own sinews himself to distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had done vastly more had he done vastly less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In letters, too soon is as bad as too late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could he only have waited he might have been great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he plumped into Helicon up to the waist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And muddied the stream ere he took his first taste.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There is Hawthorne, with genius so shrinking and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you hardly at first see the strength that is there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A frame so robust, with a nature so sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So earnest, so graceful, so lithe and so fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is worth a descent from Olympus to meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis as if a rough oak that for ages had stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his gnarled bony branches like ribs of the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should bloom, after cycles of struggle and scathe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a single anemone trembly and rathe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His strength is so tender, his wildness so meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a suitable parallel sets one to seek⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s a John Bunyan Fouque, a Puritan Tieck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Nature was shaping him, clay was not granted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For making so full-sized a man as she wanted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, to fill out her model, a little she spared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some finer-grained stuff for a woman prepared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she could not have hit a more excellent plan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For making him fully and perfectly man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The success of her scheme gave her so much delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she tried it again, shortly after, in Dwight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only, while she was kneading and shaping the clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sang to her work in her sweet childish way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found, when she’d put the last touch to his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the music had somehow got mixed with the whole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Here’s Cooper, who’s written six volumes to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s as good as a lord: well, let’s grant that he’s so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If a person prefer that description of praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, a coronet’s certainly cheaper than bays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he need take no pains to convince us he’s not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As his enemies say) the American Scott.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose any twelve men, and let C. read aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one of his novels of which he’s most proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I’d lay any bet that, without ever quitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their box, they’d be all, to a man, for acquitting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has drawn you one character, though, that is new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One wildflower he’s plucked that is wet with the dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this fresh Western world, and, the thing not to mince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has done naught but copy it ill ever since;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Indians, with proper respect be it said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are just Natty Bumppo, daubed over with red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his very Long Toms are the same useful Nat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rigged up in duck pants and a sou’wester hat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though once in a Coffin, a good chance was found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have slipped the old fellow away underground).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All his other men-figures are clothes upon sticks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <i>dernière chemise</i> of a man in a fix</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As a captain besieged, when his garrison’s small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sets up caps upon poles to be seen o’er the wall);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the women he draws from one model don’t vary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All sappy as maples and flat as a prairie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a character’s wanted, he goes to the task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a cooper would do in composing a cask;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He picks out the staves, of their qualities heedful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just hoops them together as tight as is needful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if the best fortune should crown the attempt, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has made at the most something wooden and empty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Don’t suppose I would underrate Cooper’s abilities;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I thought you’d do that, I should feel very ill at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men who have given to <i>one</i> character life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And objective existence are not very rife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may number them all, both prose-writers and singers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without overrunning the bounds of your fingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Natty won’t go to oblivion quicker</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Adams the parson or Primrose the vicar.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There is one thing in Cooper I like, too, and that is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on manners he lectures his countrymen gratis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not precisely so either, because, for a rarity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is paid for his tickets in unpopularity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now he may overcharge his American pictures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you’ll grant there’s a good deal of truth in his strictures;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I honor the man who is willing to sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half his present repute for the freedom to think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when he has thought, be his cause strong or weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will risk t’other half for the freedom to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caring naught for what vengeance the mob has in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let that mob be the upper ten thousand or lower.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There are truths you Americans need to be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it never’ll refute them to swagger and scold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>John Bull, looking o’er the Atlantic, in choler</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At your aptness for trade, says you worship the dollar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to scorn such eye-dollar-try’s what very few do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And John goes to that church as often as you do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No matter what John says, don’t try to outcrow him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis enough to go quietly on and outgrow him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like most fathers, Bull hates to see Number One</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displacing himself in the mind of his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And detests the same faults in himself he’d neglected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he sees them again in his child’s glass reflected;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love one another you’re too like by half;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he is a bull, you’re a pretty stout calf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tear your own pasture for naught but to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a nice pair of horns you’re beginning to grow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There are one or two things I should just like to hint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For you don’t often get the truth told you in print;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most of you (this is what strikes all beholders)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have a mental and physical stoop in the shoulders;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though you ought to be free as the winds and the waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ve the gait and the manners of runaway slaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though you brag of your New World, you don’t half believe in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as much of the Old as is possible weave in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your goddess of freedom, a tight, buxom girl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lips like a cherry and teeth like a pearl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes bold as Herë’s, and hair floating free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of the sun as the spray of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can sing at a husking or romp at a shearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can trip through the forests alone without fearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can drive home the cows with a song through the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeps glancing aside into Europe’s cracked glass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hides her red hands in gloves, pinches up her lithe waist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes herself wretched with transmarine taste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She loses her fresh country charm when she takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any mirror except her own rivers and lakes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘You steal Englishmen’s books and think Englishmen’s thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their salt on her tail your wild eagle is caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your literature suits its each whisper and motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what will be thought of it over the ocean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cast clothes of Europe your statesmanship tries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mumbles again the old blarneys and lies;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forget Europe wholly, your veins throb with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the dull current in hers is but mud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let her sneer, let her say your experiment fails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her voice there’s a tremble e’en now while she rails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your shore will soon be in the nature of things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covered thick with gilt drift-wood of castaway kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where alone, as it were in a Longfellow’s Waif,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fugitive pieces will find themselves safe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O my friends, thank your god, if you have one, that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt the Old World and you set the gulf of a sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be strong-backed, brown-handed, upright as your pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the scale of a hemisphere shape your designs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be true to yourselves and this new nineteenth age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a statue by Powers, or a picture by Page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plough, sail, forge, build, carve, paint, make all over new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To your own New-World instincts contrive to be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep your ears open wide to the Future’s first call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be whatever you will, but yourselves first of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand fronting the dawn on Toil’s heaven-scaling peaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And become my new race of more practical Greeks.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hem! your likeness at present, I shudder to tell o’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that you have your slaves, and the Greek had his helot.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here a gentleman present, who had in his attic</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More pepper than brains, shrieked, ‘The man’s a fanatic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m a capital tailor with warm tar and feathers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will make him a suit that’ll serve in all weathers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we’ll argue the point first, I’m willing to reason ‘t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Palaver before condemnation’s but decent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, through my humble person, Humanity begs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the friends of true freedom a loan of bad eggs.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Apollo let one such a look of his show forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when [Greek: aeie nukti eoikios], and so forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the gentleman somehow slunk out of the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as he was going, gained courage to say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘At slavery in the abstract my whole soul rebels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am as strongly opposed to ‘t as any one else.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ay, no doubt, but whenever I’ve happened to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a wrong or a crime, it is always concrete,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered Phoebus severely; then turning to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘The mistake of such fellows as just made the fuss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is only in taking a great busy nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a part of their pitiful cotton-plantation.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there comes Miranda, Zeus! where shall I flee to?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has such a penchant for bothering me too!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She always keeps asking if I don’t observe a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Particular likeness ’twixt her and Minerva;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She tells me my efforts in verse are quite clever;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s been travelling now, and will be worse than ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would think, though, a sharp-sighted noter she’d be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all that’s worth mentioning over the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a woman must surely see well, if she try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole of whose being’s a capital I:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will take an old notion, and make it her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By saying it o’er in her Sibylline tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or persuade you ’tis something tremendously deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By repeating it so as to put you to sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she well may defy any mortal to see through it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When once she has mixed up her infinite <i>me</i> through it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is one thing she owns in her own single right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is native and genuine⁠—namely, her spite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though, when acting as censor, she privately blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A censer of vanity ’neath her own nose.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here Miranda came up, and said, ‘Phoebus! you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the Infinite Soul has its infinite woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I ought to know, having lived cheek by jowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since the day I was born, with the Infinite Soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I myself introduced, I myself, I alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my Land’s better life authors solely my own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who the sad heart of earth on their shoulders have taken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose works sound a depth by Life’s quiet unshaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Shakespeare, for instance, the Bible, and Bacon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to mention my own works; Time’s nadir is fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as for myself, I’m quite out of conceit’⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Quite out of conceit! I’m enchanted to hear it,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried Apollo aside. ‘Who’d have thought she was near it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be sure, one is apt to exhaust those commodities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One uses too fast, yet in this case as odd it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if Neptune should say to his turbots and whitings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’m as much out of salt as Miranda’s own writings”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which, as she in her own happy manner has said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sound a depth, for ’tis one of the functions of lead).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She often has asked me if I could not find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A place somewhere near me that suited her mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know but a single one vacant, which she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her rare talent that way, would fit to a T.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it would not imply any pause or cessation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the work she esteems her peculiar vocation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She may enter on duty to-day, if she chooses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And remain Tiring-woman for life to the Muses.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Miranda meanwhile has succeeded in driving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up into a corner, in spite of their striving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A small flock of terrified victims, and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an I-turn-the-crank-of-the-Universe air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a tone which, at least to <i>my</i> fancy, appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so much to be entering as boxing your ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is unfolding a tale (of herself, I surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis dotted as thick as a peacock’s with I’s),</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Apropos</i> of Miranda, I’ll rest on my oars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drift through a trifling digression on bores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though not wearing ear-rings <i>in more majorum</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our ears are kept bored just as if we still wore ’em.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was one feudal custom worth keeping, at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roasted bores made a part of each well-ordered feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of all quiet pleasures the very <i>ne plus</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in hunting wild bores as the tame ones hunt us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Archæologians, I know, who have personal fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this wise application of hounds and of spears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have tried to make out, with a zeal more than wonted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas a kind of wild swine that our ancestors hunted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I’ll never believe that the age which has strewn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Europe o’er with cathedrals, and otherwise shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it knew what was what, could by chance not have known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Spending, too, its chief time with its buff on, no doubt)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which beast ’twould improve the world most to thin out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I divide bores myself, in the manner of rifles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into two great divisions, regardless of trifles:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s your smooth-bore and screw-bore, who do not much vary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the weight of cold lead they respectively carry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The smooth-bore is one in whose essence the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a corner nor cranny to cling by can find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You feel as in nightmares sometimes, when you slip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down a steep slated roof, where there’s nothing to grip;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You slide and you slide, the blank horror increases⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You had rather by far be at once smashed to pieces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You fancy a whirlpool below white and frothing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finally drop off and light upon⁠—nothing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The screw-bore has twists in him, faint predilections</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For going just wrong in the tritest directions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he’s wrong he is flat, when he’s right he can’t show it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll tell you what Snooks said about the new poet,[3]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or how Fogrum was outraged by Tennyson’s Princess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has spent all his spare time and intellect since his</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birth in perusing, on each art and science,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just the books in which no one puts any reliance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though <i>nemo</i>, we’re told, <i>horis omnibus sapit</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rule will not fit him, however you shape it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he has a perennial foison of sappiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has just enough force to spoil half your day’s happiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to make him a sort of mosquito to be with,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But just not enough to dispute or agree with.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These sketches I made (not to be too explicit)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From two honest fellows who made me a visit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broke, like the tale of the Bear and the Fiddle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My reflections on Halleck short off by the middle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sha’n’t now go into the subject more deeply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I notice that some of my readers look sleep’ly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will barely remark that, ‘mongst civilized nations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s none that displays more exemplary patience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under all sorts of boring, at all sorts of hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all sorts of desperate persons, than ours.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to speak of our papers, our State legislatures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other such trials for sensitive natures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just look for a moment at Congress⁠—appalled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fancy shrinks back from the phantom it called;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, there’s scarcely a member unworthy to frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath what Fourier nicknames the Boreal crown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only think what that infinite bore-pow’r could do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If applied with a utilitarian view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suppose, for example, we shipped it with care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Sahara’s great desert and let it bore there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they held one short session and did nothing else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’d fill the whole waste with Artesian wells.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis time now with pen phonographic to follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through some more of his sketches our laughing Apollo:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There comes Harry Franco, and, as he draws near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You find that’s a smile which you took for a sneer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One half of him contradicts t’other; his wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to say very sharp things and do very blunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His manner’s as hard as his feelings are tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a <i>sortie</i> he’ll make when he means to surrender;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s in joke half the time when he seems to be sternest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he seems to be joking, be sure he’s in earnest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has common sense in a way that’s uncommon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hates humbug and cant, loves his friends like a woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Builds his dislikes of cards and his friendships of oak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves a prejudice better than aught but a joke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is half upright Quaker, half downright Come-outer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves Freedom too well to go stark mad about her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite artless himself, is a lover of Art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shuts you out of his secrets, and into his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though not a poet, yet all must admire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his letters of Pinto his skill on the liar.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There comes Poe, with his raven, like Barnaby Rudge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three fifths of him genius and two fifths sheer fudge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who talks like a book of iambs and pentameters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a way to make people of common sense damn metres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has written some things quite the best of their kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the heart somehow seems all squeezed out by the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who⁠—But hey-day! What’s this? Messieurs Mathews and Poe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You mustn’t fling mud-balls at Longfellow so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does it make a man worse that his character’s such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to make his friends love him (as you think) too much?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, there is not a bard at this moment alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More willing than he that his fellows should thrive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While you are abusing him thus, even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would help either one of you out of a slough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may say that he’s smooth and all that till you’re hoarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But remember that elegance also is force;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After polishing granite as much as you will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart keeps its tough old persistency still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deduct all you can, <i>that</i> still keeps you at bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, he’ll live till men weary of Collins and Gray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m not over-fond of Greek metres in English,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me rhyme’s a gain, so it be not too jinglish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your modern hexameter verses are no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Greek ones than sleek Mr. Pope is like Homer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the roar of the sea to the coo of a pigeon is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, compared to your moderns, sounds old Melesigenes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may be too partial, the reason, perhaps, o’t is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I’ve heard the old blind man recite his own rhapsodies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my ear with that music impregnate may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the poor exiled shell with the soul of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as one can’t bear Strauss when his nature is cloven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To its deeps within deeps by the stroke of Beethoven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, set that aside, and ’tis truth that I speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had Theocritus written in English, not Greek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I believe that his exquisite sense would scarce change a line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that rare, tender, virgin-like pastoral Evangeline.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s not ancient nor modern, its place is apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where time has no sway, in the realm of pure Art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a shrine of retreat from Earth’s hubbub and strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As quiet and chaste as the author’s own life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There comes Philothea, her face all aglow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has just been dividing some poor creature’s woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can’t tell which pleases her most, to relieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His want, or his story to hear and believe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt against many deep griefs she prevails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her ear is the refuge of destitute tales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knows well that silence is sorrow’s best food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that talking draws off from the heart its black blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So she’ll listen with patience and let you unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your bundle of rags as ’twere pure cloth of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, indeed, it all turns to as soon as she’s touched it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (to borrow a phrase from the nursery) <i>muched</i> it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has such a musical taste, she will go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any distance to hear one who draws a long bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will swallow a wonder by mere might and main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thinks it Geometry’s fault if she’s fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To consider things flat, inasmuch as they’re plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Facts with her are accomplished, as Frenchmen would say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will prove all she wishes them to either way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as fact lies on this side or that, we must try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we’re seeking the truth, to find where it don’t lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was telling her once of a marvellous aloe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for thousands of years had looked spindling and sallow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though nursed by the fruitfullest powers of mud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had never vouchsafed e’en so much as a bud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till its owner remarked (as a sailor, you know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Often will in a calm) that it never would blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he wished to exhibit the plant, and designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That its blowing should help him in raising the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last it was told him that if he should water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its roots with the blood of his unmarried daughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Who was born, as her mother, a Calvinist, said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With William Law’s serious caul on her head),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would blow as the obstinate breeze did when by a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like decree of her father died Iphigenia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first he declared he himself would be blowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere his conscience with such a foul crime he would load,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the thought, coming oft, grew less dark than before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he mused, as each creditor knocked at his door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If <i>this</i> were but done they would dun me no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I told Philothea his struggles and doubts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how he considered the ins and the outs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the visions he had, and the dreadful dyspepsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he went to the seër that lives at Po’keepsie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the seër advised him to sleep on it first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to read his big volume in case of the worst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And further advised he should pay him five dollars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For writing [Old English: Hum Hum] on his wristbands and collars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three years and ten days these dark words he had studied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the daughter was missed, and the aloe had budded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I told how he watched it grow large and more large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondered how much for the show he should charge⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had listened with utter indifference to this, till</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I told how it bloomed, and, discharging its pistil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an aim the Eumenides dictated, shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The botanical filicide dead on the spot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It had blown, but he reaped not his horrible gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it blew with such force as to blow out his brains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the crime was blown also, because on the wad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which was paper, was writ “Visitation of God,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as a thrilling account of the deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the coroner kindly allowed me to read.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Well, my friend took this story up just, to be sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one might a poor foundling that’s laid at one’s door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She combed it and washed it and clothed it and fed it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as if ’twere her own child most tenderly bred it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid the scene (of the legend, I mean) far away a-</span>
					<br/>
					<span>-mong the green vales underneath Himalaya,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by artist-like touches, laid on here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made the whole thing so touching, I frankly declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have read it all thrice, and, perhaps I am weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I found every time there were tears on my cheek.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘The pole, science tells us, the magnet controls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she is a magnet to emigrant Poles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And folks with a mission that nobody knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throng thickly about her as bees round a rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She can fill up the <i>carets</i> in such, make their scope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Converge to some focus of rational hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with sympathies fresh as the morning, their gall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can transmute into honey⁠—but this is not all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only for those she has solace, oh say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vice’s desperate nursling adrift in Broadway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who clingest, with all that is left of thee human,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the last slender spar from the wreck of the woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou not found one shore where those tired drooping feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could reach firm mother-earth, one full heart on whose beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soothed head in silence reposing could hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chimes of far childhood throb back on the ear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, there’s many a beam from the fountain of day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, to reach us unclouded, must pass, on its way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the soul of a woman, and hers is wide ope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the influence of Heaven as the blue eyes of Hope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, a great heart is hers, one that dares to go in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the prison, the slave-hut, the alleys of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to bring into each, or to find there, some line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the never completely out-trampled divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If her heart at high floods swamps her brain now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but richer for that when the tide ebbs agen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, after old Nile has subsided, his plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Overflows with a second broad deluge of grain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a wealth would it tiring to the narrow and sour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could they be as a Child but for one little hour!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘What! Irving? thrice welcome, warm heart and fine brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You bring back the happiest spirit from Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the gravest sweet humor, that ever were there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Cervantes met death in his gentle despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, don’t be embarrassed, nor look so beseeching,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sha’n’t run directly against my own preaching,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, having just laughed at their Raphaels and Dantes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go to setting you up beside matchless Cervantes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But allow me to speak what I honestly feel⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a true poet-heart add the fun of Dick Steele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw in all of Addison, <i>minus</i> the chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the whole of that partnership’s stock and good-will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mix well, and while stirring, hum o’er, as a spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fine <i>old</i> English Gentleman, simmer it well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeten just to your own private liking, then strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That only the finest and clearest remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let it stand out of doors till a soul it receives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the warm lazy sun loitering down through green leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you’ll find a choice nature, not wholly deserving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A name either English or Yankee⁠—just Irving.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There goes⁠—but <i>stet nominis umbra</i>⁠—his name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll be glad enough, some day or other, to claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will all crowd about him and swear that you knew him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If some English critic should chance to review him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old <i>porcos ante ne projiciatis</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><b>Margaritas</b>, for him you have verified gratis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What matters his name? Why, it may be Sylvester,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judd, Junior, or Junius, Ulysses, or Nestor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For aught <i>I</i> know or care; ’tis enough that I look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the author of “Margaret,” the first Yankee book</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the <i>soul</i> of Down East in ‘t, and things farther East,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as the threshold of morning, at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where awaits the fair dawn of the simple and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the day that comes slowly to make all things new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T has a smack of pine woods, of bare field and bleak hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as only the breed of the Mayflower could till;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Puritan’s shown in it, tough to the core,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as prayed, smiting Agag on red Marston Moor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an unwilling humor, half choked by the drouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In brown hollows about the inhospitable mouth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a soul full of poetry, though it has qualms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About finding a happiness out of the Psalms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of tenderness, too, though it shrinks in the dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hamadryad-like, under the coarse, shaggy bark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sees visions, knows wrestlings of God with the Will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And has its own Sinais and thunderings still.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here, ‘Forgive me, Apollo,’ I cried, ‘while I pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart out to my birthplace: O loved more and more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Baystate, from whose rocky bosom thy sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should suck milk, strong-will-giving, brave, such as runs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the veins of old Greylock⁠—who is it that dares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call thee pedler, a soul wrapped in bank-books and shares?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is false! She’s a Poet! I see, as I write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the far railroad the steam-snake glide white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cataract-throb of her mill-hearts, I hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The swift strokes of trip-hammers weary my ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sledges ring upon anvils, through logs the saw screams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blocks swing to their place, beetles drive home the beams:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is songs such as these that she croons to the din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her fast-flying shuttles, year out and year in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from earth’s farthest corner there comes not a breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wafts her the buzz of her gold-gleaning bees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though those horn hands have as yet found small time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For painting and sculpture and music and rhyme?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These will come in due order; the need that pressed sorest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was to vanquish the seasons, the ocean, the forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bridle and harness the rivers, the steam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making those whirl her mill-wheels, this tug in her team,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vassalize old tyrant Winter, and make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him delve surlily for her on river and lake;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this New World was parted, she strove not to shirk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lot in the heirdom, the tough, silent Work,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero-share ever from Herakles down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Odin, the Earth’s iron sceptre and crown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, thou dear, noble Mother! if ever men’s praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could be claimed for creating heroical lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast won it; if ever the laurel divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crowned the Maker and Builder, that glory is thine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy songs are right epic, they tell how this rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rock-rib of our earth here was tamed and subdued;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast written them plain on the face of the planet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In brave, deathless letters of iron and granite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast printed them deep for all time; they are set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the same runic type-fount and alphabet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy stout Berkshire hills and the arms of thy Bay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are staves from the burly old Mayflower lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the drones of the Old World, in querulous ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask thy Art and thy Letters, point proudly to these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if they deny these are Letters and Art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toil on with the same old invincible heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art rearing the pedestal broad-based and grand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon the fair shapes of the Artist shall stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And creating, through labors undaunted and long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The theme for all Sculpture and Painting and Song!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘But my good mother Baystate wants no praise of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She learned from <i>her</i> mother a precept divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About something that butters no parsnips, her <i>forte</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In another direction lies, work is her sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though she’ll curtsey and set her cap straight, that she will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you talk about Plymouth and red Bunker’s hill).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear, notable goodwife! by this time of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hearth is swept neatly, her fire burning bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she sits in a chair (of home plan and make) rocking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Musing much, all the while, as she darns on a stocking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether turkeys will come pretty high next Thanksgiving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether flour’ll be so dear, for, as sure as she’s living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will use rye-and-injun then, whether the pig</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this time ain’t got pretty tolerable big,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether to sell it outright will be best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to smoke hams and shoulders and salt down the rest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this minute, she’d swop all my verses, ah, cruel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the last patent stove that is saving of fuel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I’ll just let Apollo go on, for his phiz</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shows I’ve kept him awaiting too long as it is.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘If our friend, there, who seems a reporter, is done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his burst of emotion, why, I will go on,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Apollo; some smiled, and, indeed, I must own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was something sarcastic, perhaps, in his tone;⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There’s Holmes, who is matchless among you for wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Leyden-jar always full-charged, from which flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The electrical tingles of hit after hit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In long poems ’tis painful sometimes, and invites</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thought of the way the new Telegraph writes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which pricks down its little sharp sentences spitefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if you got more than you’d title to rightfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you find yourself hoping its wild father Lightning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would flame in for a second and give you a fright’ning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has perfect sway of what I call a sham metre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But many admire it, the English pentameter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Campbell, I think, wrote most commonly worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With less nerve, swing, and fire in the same kind of verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor e’er achieved aught in’t so worthy of praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the tribute of Holmes to the grand <i>Marseillaise</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You went crazy last year over Bulwer’s New Timon;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, if B., to the day of his dying, should rhyme on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaping verses on verses and tomes upon tomes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could ne’er reach the best point and vigor of Holmes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His are just the fine hands, too, to weave you a lyric</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of fancy, fun, feeling, or spiced with satiric</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a measure so kindly, you doubt if the toes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That are trodden upon are your own or your foes’.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There is Lowell, who’s striving Parnassus to climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a whole bale of <i>isms</i> tied together with rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might get on alone, spite of brambles and boulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he can’t with that bundle he has on his shoulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The top of the hill he will ne’er come nigh reaching</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he learns the distinction ’twixt singing and preaching;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lyre has some chords that would ring pretty well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he’d rather by half make a drum of the shell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rattle away till he’s old as Methusalem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the head of a march to the last new Jerusalem.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘There goes Halleck, whose Fanny’s a pseudo Don Juan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the wickedness out that gave salt to the true one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s a wit, though, I hear, of the very first order,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once made a pun on the words soft Recorder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than this, he’s a very great poet, I’m told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And has had his works published in crimson and gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With something they call “Illustrations,” to wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like those with which Chapman obscured Holy Writ,[4]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which are said to illustrate, because, as I view it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like <i>lucus a non</i>, they precisely don’t do it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let a man who can write what himself understands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep clear, if he can, of designing men’s hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who bury the sense, if there’s any worth having,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then very honestly call it engraving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, to quit <i>badinage</i>, which there isn’t much wit in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Halleck’s better, I doubt not, than all he has written;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his verse a clear glimpse you will frequently find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not of a great, of a fortunate mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which contrives to be true to its natural loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a world of back-offices, ledgers, and stoves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When his heart breaks away from the brokers and banks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kneels in his own private shrine to give thanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s a genial manliness in him that earns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our sincerest respect (read, for instance, his “Burns”),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we can’t but regret (seek excuse where we may)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so much of a man has been peddled away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘But what’s that? a mass-meeting? No, there come in lots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The American Bulwers, Disraelis, and Scotts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in short the American everything elses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each charging the others with envies and jealousies;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the way, ’tis a fact that displays what profusions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all kinds of greatness bless free institutions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That while the Old World has produced barely eight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such poets as all men agree to call great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of other great characters hardly a score</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(One might safely say less than that rather than more),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With you every year a whole crop is begotten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re as much of a staple as corn is, or cotton;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, there’s scarcely a huddle of log-huts and shanties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That has not brought forth its own Miltons and Dantes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I myself know ten Byrons, one Coleridge, three Shelleys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two Raphaels, six Titians (I think), one Apelles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leonardos and Rubenses plenty as lichens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One (but that one is plenty) American Dickens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A whole flock of Lambs, any number of Tennysons⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, if a man has the luck to have any sons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may feel pretty certain that one out of twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be some very great person over again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is one inconvenience in all this, which lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fact that by contrast we estimate size,[5]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, where there are none except Titans, great stature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is only the normal proceeding of nature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What puff the strained sails of your praise will you furl at, if</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The calmest degree that you know is superlative?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Rome, all whom Charon took into his wherry must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a matter of course, be well <i>issimust</i> and <i>errimust</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Greek, too, could feel, while in that famous boat he tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his friends would take care he was [Greek: istost] and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>[Greek: otatost],</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And formerly we, as through graveyards we past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought the world went from bad to worst fearfully fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us glance for a moment, ’tis well worth the pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And note what an average graveyard contains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lie levellers levelled, duns done up themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are booksellers finally laid on their shelves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horizontally there lie upright politicians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dose-a-dose with their patients sleep faultless physicians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are slave-drivers quietly whipped under ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There bookbinders, done up in boards, are fast bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There card-players wait till the last trump be played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There all the choice spirits get finally laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the babe that’s unborn is supplied with a berth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There men without legs get their six feet of earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lawyers repose, each wrapped up in his case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There seekers of office are sure of a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There defendant and plaintiff get equally cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shoemakers quietly stick to the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There brokers at length become silent as stocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There stage-drivers sleep without quitting their box,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so forth and so forth and so forth and so on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this kind of stuff one might endlessly go on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To come to the point, I may safely assert you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will find in each yard every cardinal virtue;[6]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each has six truest patriots: four discoverers of ether,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who never had thought on ‘t nor mentioned it either;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten poets, the greatest who ever wrote rhyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two hundred and forty first men of their time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One person whose portrait just gave the least hint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its original had a most horrible squint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One critic, most (what do they call it?) reflective,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who never had used the phrase ob-or subjective:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forty fathers of Freedom, of whom twenty bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sons for the rice-swamps, at so much a head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their daughters for⁠—faugh! thirty mothers of Gracchi:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Non-resistants who gave many a spiritual blackeye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eight true friends of their kind, one of whom was a jailer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four captains almost as astounding as Taylor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two dozen of Italy’s exiles who shoot us his</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kaisership daily, stern pen-and-ink Brutuses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, in Yankee back-parlors, with crucified smile,[7]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mount serenely their country’s funereal pile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ninety-nine Irish heroes, ferocious rebellers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst the Saxon in cis-marine garrets and cellars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shake their dread fists o’er the sea and all that⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As long as a copper drops into the hat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine hundred Teutonic republicans stark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Vaterland’s battle just won⁠—in the Park,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who the happy profession of martyrdom take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenever it gives them a chance at a steak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sixty-two second Washingtons: two or three Jacksons:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so many everythings else that it racks one’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor memory too much to continue the list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Especially now they no longer exist;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would merely observe that you’ve taken to giving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The puffs that belong to the dead to the living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that somehow your trump-of-contemporary-doom’s tones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is tuned after old dedications and tombstones.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here the critic came in and a thistle presented⁠—[8]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a frown to a smile the god’s features relented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he stared at his envoy, who, swelling with pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the god’s asking look, nothing daunted, replied⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘You’re surprised, I suppose, I was absent so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But your godship respecting the lilies was wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hunted the garden from one end to t’other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And got no reward but vexation and bother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, tossed out with weeds in a corner to wither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one lily I found and made haste to bring hither.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Did he think I had given him a book to review?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ought to have known what the fellow would do,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muttered Phoebus aside, ‘for a thistle will pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond doubt for the queen of all flowers with an ass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has chosen in just the same way as he’d choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His specimens out of the books he reviews;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, as this offers an excellent text,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll give ’em some brief hints on criticism next.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, musing a moment, he turned to the crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, clearing his voice, spoke as follows aloud:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘My friends, in the happier days of the muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We were luckily free from such things as reviews;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then naught came between with its fog to make clearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart of the poet to that of his hearer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the poet brought heaven to the people, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt that they, too, were poets in hearing his lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the poet was prophet, the past in his soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precreated the future, both parts of one whole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then for him there was nothing too great or too small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one natural deity sanctified all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the bard owned no clipper and meter of moods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save the spirit of silence that hovers and broods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the seas and the mountains, the rivers and woods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He asked not earth’s verdict, forgetting the clods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul soared and sang to an audience of gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas for them that he measured the thought and the line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shaped for their vision the perfect design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With as glorious a foresight, a balance as true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As swung out the worlds in the infinite blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then a glory and greatness invested man’s heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The universal, which now stands estranged and apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the free individual moulded, was Art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the forms of the Artist seemed thrilled with desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For something as yet unattained, fuller, higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once with her lips, lifted hands, and eyes listening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her whole upward soul in her countenance glistening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eurydice stood⁠—like a beacon unfired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, once touched with flame, will leap heav’nward inspired⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waited with answering kindle to mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first gleam of Orpheus that pained the red Dark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then painting, song, sculpture did more than relieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The need that men feel to create and believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as, in all beauty, who listens with love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hears these words oft repeated⁠—“beyond and above,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So these seemed to be but the visible sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the grasp of the soul after things more divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were ladders the Artist erected to climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the narrow horizon of space and of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we see there the footsteps by which men had gained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the one rapturous glimpse of the never-attained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As shepherds could erst sometimes trace in the sod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last spurning print of a sky-cleaving god.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘But now, on the poet’s dis-privacied moods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With <i>do this</i> and <i>do that</i> the pert critic intrudes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he thinks he’s been barely fulfilling his duty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To interpret ’twixt men and their own sense of beauty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And has striven, while others sought honor or pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make his kind happy as he was himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He finds he’s been guilty of horrid offences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all kinds of moods, numbers, genders, and tenses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s been <i>ob</i> and _sub_jective, what Kettle calls Pot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precisely, at all events, what he ought not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>You have done this,</i> says one judge; <i>done that,</i> says another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>You should have done this,</i> grumbles one; <i>that,</i> says t’other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never mind what he touches, one shrieks out <i>Taboo!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while he is wondering what he shall do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since each suggests opposite topics for song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all shout together <i>you’re right!</i> and <i>you’re wrong!</i></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Nature fits all her children with something to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who would write and can’t write can surely review,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can set up a small booth as critic and sell us his</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Petty conceit and his pettier jealousies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus a lawyer’s apprentice, just out of his teens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will do for the Jeffrey of six magazines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having read Johnson’s lives of the poets half through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s nothing on earth he’s not competent to;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He reviews with as much nonchalance as he whistles⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He goes through a book and just picks out the thistles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It matters not whether he blame or commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he’s bad as a foe, he’s far worse as a friend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let an author but write what’s above his poor scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He goes to work gravely and twists up a rope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, inviting the world to see punishment done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hangs himself up to bleach in the wind and the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis delightful to see, when a man comes along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has anything in him peculiar and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every cockboat that swims clear its fierce (pop) gundeck at him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make as he passes its ludicrous Peck at him⁠—’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here Miranda came up and began, ‘As to that⁠—’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo at once seized his gloves, cane, and hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, seeing the place getting rapidly cleared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I too snatched my notes and forthwith disappeared.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-vision-of-sir-launfal" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Vision of Sir Launfal</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">According to the mythology of the Romancers, the San Greal, or Holy Grail, was the cup out of which Jesus partook of the Last Supper with his disciples. It was brought into England by Joseph of Arimathea, and remained there, an object of pilgrimage and adoration, for many years in the keeping of his lineal descendants. It was incumbent upon those who had charge of it to be chaste in thought, word, and deed; but one of the keepers having broken this condition, the Holy Grail disappeared. From that time it was a favorite enterprise of the knights of Arthur’s court to go in search of it. Sir Galahad was at last successful in finding it, as may be read in the seventeenth book of the Romance of King Arthur. Tennyson has made Sir Galahad the subject of one of the most exquisite of his poems.</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The plot (if I may give that name to anything so slight) of the following poem is my own, and, to serve its purposes, I have enlarged the circle of competition in search of the miraculous cup in such a manner as to include, not only other persons than the heroes of the Round Table, but also a period of time subsequent to the supposed date of King Arthur’s reign.</p>
			</header>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">Prelude to Part First</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Over his keys the musing organist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beginning doubtfully and far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First lets his fingers wander as they list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And builds a bridge from Dreamland for his lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as the touch of his loved instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gives hope and fervor, nearer draws his theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First guessed by faint auroral flushes sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the wavering vista of his dream.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Not only around our infancy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth heaven with all its splendors lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daily, with souls that cringe and plot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We Sinais climb and know it not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Over our manhood bend the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against our fallen and traitor lives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great winds utter prophecies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With our faint hearts the mountain strives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its arms outstretched, the druid wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waits with its benedicite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to our age’s drowsy Wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still shouts the inspiring sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Earth gets its price for what Earth gives us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beggar is taxed for a corner to die in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The priest hath his lee who comes and shrives us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We bargain for the graves we lie in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the devil’s booth are all things sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a cap and bells our lives we pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bubbles we buy with a whole soul’s tasking:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis heaven alone that is given away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis only God may be had for the asking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No price is set on the lavish summer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>June may be had by the poorest comer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And what is so rare as a day in June?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, if ever, come perfect days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Heaven tries earth if it be in tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over it softly her warm ear lays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether we look, or whether we listen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hear life murmur, or see it glisten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every clod feels a stir of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An instinct within it that reaches and towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, groping blindly above it for light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flush of life may well be seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrilling back over hills and valleys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cowslip startles in meadows green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The buttercup catches the sun in its chalice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there’s never a leaf nor a blade too mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be some happy creature’s palace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little bird sits at his door in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Atilt like a blossom among the leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lets his illumined being o’errun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the deluge of summer it receives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mate feels the eggs beneath her wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the heart in her dumb breast flutters and sings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sings to the wide world, and she to her nest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the nice ear of Nature which song is the best?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now is the high-tide of the year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whatever of life hath ebbed away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes flooding back with a ripply cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into every bare inlet and creek and bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the heart is so full that a drop overfills it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are happy now because God wills it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No matter how barren the past may have been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis enough for us now that the leaves are green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sit in the warm shade and feel right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the sap creeps up and the blossoms swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We may shut our eyes, but we cannot help knowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That skies are clear and grass is growing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breeze comes whispering in our ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dandelions are blossoming near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That maize has sprouted, that streams are flowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the river is bluer than the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the robin is plastering his house hard by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if the breeze kept the good news back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For other couriers we should not lack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We could guess it all by yon heifer’s lowing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hark! how clear bold chanticleer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warmed with the new wine of the year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tells all in his lusty crowing!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Joy comes, grief goes, we know not how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Everything is happy now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Everything is upward striving;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis as easy now for the heart to be true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for grass to be green or skies to be blue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis the natural way of living:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knows whither the clouds have fled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the unscarred heaven they leave no wake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the eyes forget the tears they have shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heart forgets its sorrow and ache;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul partakes the season’s youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sulphurous rifts of passion and woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie deep ’neath a silence pure and smooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like burnt-out craters healed with snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder if Sir Launfal now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembered the keeping of his vow?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">First</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘My golden spurs now bring to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And bring to me my richest mail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to-morrow I go over land and sea</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In search of the Holy Grail;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall never a bed for me be spread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor shall a pillow be under my head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I begin my vow to keep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here on the rushes will I sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And perchance there may come a vision true</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere day create the world anew.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Slowly Sir Launfal’s eyes grew dim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Slumber fell like a cloud on him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And into his soul the vision flew.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The crows flapped over by twos and threes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the pool drowsed the cattle up to their knees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The little birds sang as if it were</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The one day of summer in all the year,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the very leaves seemed to sing on the trees:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The castle alone in the landscape lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like an outpost of winter, dull and gray:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas the proudest hall in the North Countree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And never its gates might opened be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save to lord or lady of high degree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Summer besieged it on every side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the churlish stone her assaults defied;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She could not scale the chilly wall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though around it for leagues her pavilions tall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stretched left and right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the hills and out of sight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Green and broad was every tent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And out of each a murmur went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till the breeze fell off at night.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The drawbridge dropped with a surly clang,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And through the dark arch a charger sprang,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearing Sir Launfal, the maiden knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In his gilded mail, that flamed so bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It seemed the dark castle had gathered all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those shafts the fierce sun had shot over its wall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In his siege of three hundred summers long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, binding them all in one blazing sheaf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had cast them forth: so, young and strong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lightsome as a locust-leaf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sir Launfal flashed forth in his maiden mail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To seek in all climes for the Holy Grail.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It was morning on hill and stream and tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And morning in the young knight’s heart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only the castle moodily</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rebuffed the gifts of the sunshine free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And gloomed by itself apart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The season brimmed all other things up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full as the rain fills the pitcher-plant’s cup.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As Sir Launfal made morn through the darksome gate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He was ‘ware of a leper, crouched by the same,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who begged with his hand and moaned as he sate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a loathing over Sir Launfal came;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sunshine went out of his soul with a thrill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The flesh ’neath his armor ‘gan shrink and crawl,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And midway its leap his heart stood still</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like a frozen waterfall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this man, so foul and bent of stature,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rasped harshly against his dainty nature,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seemed the one blot on the summer morn⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So he tossed him a piece of gold in scorn.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The leper raised not the gold from the dust:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Better to me the poor man’s crust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better the blessing of the poor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though I turn me empty from his door;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is no true alms which the hand can hold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He gives only the worthless gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who gives from a sense of duty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he who gives but a slender mite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gives to that which is out of sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That thread of the all-sustaining Beauty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which runs through all and doth all unite⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hand cannot clasp the whole of his alms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The heart outstretches its eager palms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a god goes with it and makes it store</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the soul that was starving in darkness before.’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">Prelude to Part Second</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Down swept the chill wind from the mountain peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the snow five thousand summers old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On open wold and hilltop bleak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It had gathered all the cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whirled it like sleet on the wanderer’s cheek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It carried a shiver everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the unleafed boughs and pastures bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little brook heard it and built a roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath which he could house him, winter-proof;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night by the white stars’ frosty gleams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He groined his arches and matched his beams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slender and clear were his crystal spars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the lashes of light that trim the stars:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sculptured every summer delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his halls and chambers out of sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes his tinkling waters slipt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down through a frost-leaved forest-crypt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long, sparkling aisles of steel-stemmed trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bending to counterfeit a breeze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes the roof no fretwork knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But silvery mosses that downward grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes it was carved in sharp relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quaint arabesques of ice-fern leaf;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes it was simply smooth and clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the gladness of heaven to shine through, and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had caught the nodding bulrush-tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hung them thickly with diamond drops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crystalled the beams of moon and sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a star of every one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No mortal builder’s most rare device</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could match this winter-palace of ice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas as if every image that mirrored lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his depths serene through the summer day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each fleeting shadow of earth and sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest the happy model should be lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been mimicked in fairy masonry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the elfin builders of the frost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within the hall are song and laughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cheeks of Christmas glow red and jolly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sprouting is every corbel and rafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lightsome green of ivy and holly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the deep gulf of the chimney wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wallows the Yule-log’s roaring tide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The broad flame-pennons droop and flap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And belly and tug as a flag in the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a locust shrills the imprisoned sap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunted to death in its galleries blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swift little troops of silent sparks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now pausing, now scattering away as in fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go threading the soot-forest’s tangled darks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like herds of startled deer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the wind without was eager and sharp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Sir Launfal’s gray hair it makes a harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And rattles and wrings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The icy strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing, in dreary monotone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Christmas carol of its own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose burden still, as he might guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was ‘Shelterless, shelterless, shelterless!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice of the seneschal flared like a torch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he shouted the wanderer away from the porch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he sat in the gateway and saw all night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great hall-fire, so cheery and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the window-slits of the castle old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Build out its piers of ruddy light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the drift of the cold.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Second</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There was never a leaf on bush or tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bare boughs rattled shudderingly;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The river was dumb and could not speak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For the weaver Winter its shroud had spun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A single crow on the tree-top bleak</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From his shining feathers shed off the cold sun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Again it was morning, but shrunk and cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if her veins were sapless and old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she rose up decrepitly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a last dim look at earth and sea.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sir Launfal turned from his own hard gate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For another heir in his earldom sate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An old, bent man, worn out and frail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He came back from seeking the Holy Grail;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Little he recked of his earldom’s loss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more on his surcoat was blazoned the cross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But deep in his soul the sign he wore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The badge of the suffering and the poor.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sir Launfal’s raiment thin and spare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was idle mail ’gainst the barbèd air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For it was just at the Christmas time;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So he mused, as he sat, of a sunnier clime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sought for a shelter from cold and snow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the light and warmth of long-ago;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He sees the snake-like caravan crawl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’er the edge of the desert, black and small,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then nearer and nearer, till, one by one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He can count the camels in the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As over the red-hot sands they pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To where, in its slender necklace of grass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little spring laughed and leapt in the shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with its own self like an infant played,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And waved its signal of palms.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>‘For Christ’s sweet sake, I beg an alms;’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The happy camels may reach the spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Sir Launfal sees only the grewsome thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The leper, lank as the rain-blanched bone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cowers beside him, a thing as lone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And white as the ice-isles of Northern seas</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the desolate horror of his disease.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And Sir Launfal said, ‘I behold in thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An image of Him who died on the tree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou also hast had thy crown of thorns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou also hast had the world’s buffets and scorns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to thy life were not denied</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wounds in the hands and feet and side:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mild Mary’s Son, acknowledge me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behold, through him, I give to thee!’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then the soul of the leper stood up in his eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And looked at Sir Launfal, and straightway he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remembered in what a haughtier guise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He had flung an alms to leprosie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When he girt his young life up in gilded mail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And set forth in search of the Holy Grail.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The heart within him was ashes and dust;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He parted in twain his single crust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He broke the ice on the streamlet’s brink,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gave the leper to eat and drink.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas a mouldy crust of coarse brown bread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Twas water out of a wooden bowl⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet with fine wheaten bread was the leper fed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And ’twas red wine he drank with his thirsty soul.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As Sir Launfal mused with a downcast face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A light shone round about the place;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The leper no longer crouched at his side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But stood before him glorified,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shining and tall and fair and straight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As the pillar that stood by the Beautiful Gate⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself the Gate whereby men can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enter the temple of God in Man.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>His words were shed softer than leaves from the pine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they fell on Sir Launfal as snows on the brine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That mingle their softness and quiet in one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the shaggy unrest they float down upon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the voice that was softer than silence said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Lo, it is I, be not afraid!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In many climes, without avail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast spent thy life for the Holy Grail;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behold, it is here⁠—this cup which thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Didst fill at the streamlet for me but now;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This crust is my body broken for thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This water his blood that died on the tree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In whatso we share with another’s need;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not what we give, but what we share,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the gift without the giver is bare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who gives himself with his alms feeds three,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself, his hungering neighbor, and me.’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sir Launfal awoke as from a swound:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘The Grail in my castle here is found!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hang my idle armor up on the wall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let it be the spider’s banquet hall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He must be fenced with stronger mail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who would seek and find the Holy Grail.’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The castle gate stands open now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the wanderer is welcome to the hall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As the hangbird is to the elm-tree bough;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No longer scowl the turrets tall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Summer’s long siege at last is o’er;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the first poor outcast went in at the door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She entered with him in disguise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mastered the fortress by surprise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no spot she loves so well on ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She lingers and smiles there the whole year round;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The meanest serf on Sir Launfal’s land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has hall and bower at his command;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there’s no poor man in the North Countree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is lord of the earldom as much as he.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="invita-minerva" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Invita Minerva</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The Bardling came where by a river grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pennoned reeds, that, as the west-wind blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed and sighed plaintively, as if they knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What music slept enchanted in each stem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Pan should choose some happy one of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with wise lips enlife it through and through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Bardling thought, ‘A pipe is all I need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once I have sought me out a clear, smooth reed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shaped it to my fancy, I proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To breathe such strains as, yonder mid the rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strange youth blows, that tends Admetus’ flocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the maidens shall to me pay heed.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The summer day he spent in questful round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a reed he marred, but never found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A conjuring-spell to free the imprisoned sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last his vainly wearied limbs he laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a sacred laurel’s flickering shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleep about his brain her cobweb wound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then strode the mighty Mother through his dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying: ‘The reeds along a thousand streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are mine, and who is he that plots and schemes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To snare the melodies wherewith my breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds through the double pipes of Life and Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atoning what to men mad discord seems?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘He seeks not me, but I seek oft in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him who shall my voiceful reeds constrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make them utter their melodious pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flies the immortal gift, for well he knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life of life must with its overflows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flood the unthankful pipe, nor come again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Thou fool, who dost my harmless subjects wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not the singer’s wish that makes the song:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rhythmic beauty wanders dumb, how long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stoops to any daintiest instrument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, found its mated lips, their sweet consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes mortal breath than Time and Fate more strong.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-first-snow-fall" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The First Snow-Fall</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The snow had begun in the gloaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And busily all the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been heaping field and highway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a silence deep and white.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Every pine and fir and hemlock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wore ermine too dear for an earl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the poorest twig on the elm-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ridged inch deep with pearl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From sheds new-roofed with Carrara</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came Chanticleer’s muffled crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stiff rails softened to swan’s-down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still fluttered down the snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I stood and watched by the window</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The noiseless work of the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sudden flurries of snowbirds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like brown leaves whirling by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I thought of a mound in sweet Auburn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where a little headstone stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the flakes were folding it gently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As did robins the babes in the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Up spoke our own little Mabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saying, ‘Father, who makes it snow?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I told of the good All-father</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cares for us here below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again I looked at the snow-fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thought of the leaden sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That arched o’er our first great sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When that mound was heaped so high.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I remembered the gradual patience</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fell from that cloud like snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flake by flake, healing and hiding</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scar that renewed our woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And again to the child I whispered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘The snow that husheth all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darling, the merciful Father</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone can make it fall!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, with eyes that saw not, I kissed her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, kissing back, could not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That <i>my</i> kiss was given to her sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Folded close under deepening snow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="trial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Trial</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whether the idle prisoner through his grate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watches the waving of the grass-tuft small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, having colonized its rift i’ th’ wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accepts God’s dole of good or evil fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the sky’s just helmet draws its lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daily of shower or sunshine, cold or hot;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the closer captive of a creed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cooped up from birth to grind out endless chaff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees through his treadmill-bars the noonday laugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feels in vain, his crumpled pinions breed;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the Georgian slave look up and mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bellying sails puffed full, the tall cloud-bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sink northward slowly⁠—thou alone seem’st good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair only thou, O Freedom, whose desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can light in muddiest souls quick seeds of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strain life’s chords to the old heroic mood.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet are there other gifts more fair than thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can I count him happiest who has never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Been forced with his own hand his chains to sever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for himself find out the way divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never knew the aspirer’s glorious pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never earned the struggle’s priceless gains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, block by block, with sore and sharp endeavor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifelong we build these human natures up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a temple fit for Freedom’s shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, Trial ever consecrates the cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefrom we pour her sacrificial wine.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sower" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sower</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I saw a Sower walking slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across the earth, from east to west;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hair was white as mountain snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His head drooped forward on his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With shrivelled hands he flung his seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever turned to look behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sight or sound he took no heed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed, he was both deaf and blind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His dim face showed no soul beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet in my heart I felt a stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I looked upon the sheath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That once had held Excalibur.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I heard, as still the seed he cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, crooning to himself, he sung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I sow again the holy Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The happy days when I was young.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Then all was wheat without a tare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then all was righteous, fair, and true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am he whose thoughtful care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall plant the Old World in the New.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘The fruitful germs I scatter free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With busy hand, while all men sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Europe now, from sea to sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nations bless me as they reap.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then I looked back along his path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heard the clash of steel on steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where man faced man, in deadly wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While clanged the tocsin’s hurrying peal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sky with burning towns flared red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nearer the noise of fighting rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brothers’ blood, by brothers shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crept curdling over pavements cold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then marked I how each germ of truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which through the dotard’s fingers ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was mated with a dragon’s tooth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence there sprang up an armèd man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I shouted, but he could not hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made signs, but these he could not see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still, without a doubt or fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broadcast he scattered anarchy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long to my straining ears the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought faintly back the words he sung:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I sow again the holy Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The happy days when I was young.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ambrose" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ambrose</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Never, surely, was holier man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Ambrose, since the world began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With diet spare and raiment thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shielded himself from the father of sin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bed of iron and scourgings oft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart to God’s hand as wax made soft.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through earnest prayer and watchings long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sought to know ’tween right and wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much wrestling with the blessed Word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make it yield the sense of the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he might build a storm-proof creed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fold the flock in at their need.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At last he builded a perfect faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fenced round about with <i>The Lord thus saith</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To himself he fitted the doorway’s size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meted the light to the need of his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew, by a sure and inward sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the work of his fingers was divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Ambrose said, ‘All those shall die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal death who believe not as I;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some were boiled, some burned in fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sawn in twain, that his heart’s desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the good of men’s souls might be satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the drawing of all to the righteous side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One day, as Ambrose was seeking the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his lonely walk, he saw a youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resting himself in the shade of a tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It had never been granted him to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shining a face, and the good man thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere pity he should not believe as he ought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So he set himself by the young man’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the state of his soul with questions tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the heart of the stranger was hardened indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor received the stamp of the one true creed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the spirit of Ambrose waxed sore to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such features the porch of so narrow a mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘As each beholds in cloud and fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shape that answers his own desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So each,’ said the youth, ‘in the Law shall find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The figure and fashion of his mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to each in his mercy hath God allowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His several pillar of fire and cloud.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The soul of Ambrose burned with zeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And holy wrath for the young man’s weal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Believest thou then, most wretched youth,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried he, ‘a dividual essence in Truth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear me thy heart is too cramped with sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the Lord in his glory in.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now there bubbled beside them where they stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fountain of waters sweet and good:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth to the streamlet’s brink drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, ‘Ambrose, thou maker of creeds, look here!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six vases of crystal then he took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set them along the edge of the brook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘As into these vessels the water I pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There shall one hold less, another more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the water unchanged, in every case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall put on the figure of the vase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, who wouldst unity make through strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou fit this sign to the Water of Life?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Ambrose looked up, he stood alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth and the stream and the vases were gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he knew, by a sense of humbled grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had talked with an angel face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt his heart change inwardly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he fell on his knees beneath the tree.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="eurydice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Eurydice</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Heaven’s cup held down to me I drain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunshine mounts and spurs my brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bathing in grass, with thirsty eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I suck the last drop of the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With each hot sense I draw to the lees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quickening out-door influences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And empty to each radiant comer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A supernaculum of summer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not, Bacchus, all thy grosser juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could bring enchantment so profuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though for its press each grape-bunch had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white feet of an Oread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through our coarse art gleam, now and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The features of angelic men:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the lewd Satyr’s veiling paint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glows forth the Sibyl, Muse, or Saint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dauber’s botch no more obscures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty master’s portraitures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who can say what luckier beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hidden glory shall redeem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what chance clod the soul may wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stumble on its nobler fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or why, to his unwarned abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still by surprises comes the God?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some moment, nailed on sorrow’s cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May meditate a whole youth’s loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some windfall joy, we know not whence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redeem a lifetime’s rash expense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, suddenly wise, the soul may mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stripped of their simulated dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mountains of gold that pierce the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girdling its valleyed poverty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I feel ye, childhood’s hopes, return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With olden heats my pulses burn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine be the self-forgetting sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The torrent impulse swift and wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith Taghkanic’s rockborn child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dares gloriously the dangerous leap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in his sky-descended mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transmutes each drop of sluggish blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By touch of bravery’s simple wand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To amethyst and diamond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proving himself no bastard slip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the true granite-cradled one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed with the rock’s primeval drip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud-embracing mountain’s son!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Prayer breathed in vain I no wish’s sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebuilds the vanished yesterday;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For plated wares of Sheffield stamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We gave the old Aladdin’s lamp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis we are changed; ah, whither went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That undesigned abandonment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wise, unquestioning content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which could erect its microcosm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of a weed’s neglected blossom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could call up Arthur and his peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a low moss’s clump of spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, in its shingle trireme launched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Charles in some green inlet-branched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could venture for the golden fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dragon-watched Hesperides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, from its ripple-shattered fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses’ chances re-create?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, heralding life’s every phase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There glowed a goddess-veiling haze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plenteous, forewarning grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like that more tender dawn that flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the full moon’s ample rise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Methinks thy parting glory shines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through yonder grove of singing pines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that elm-vista’s end I trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dimly thy sad leave-taking face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurydice! Eurydice!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tremulous leaves repeat to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurydice! Eurydice!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No gloomier Orcus swallows thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the unclouded sunset’s glow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine is at least Elysian woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast Good’s natural decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fadest like a star away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into an atmosphere whose shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fuller day o’ermasters thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering defeat as ‘t were a shrine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us⁠—we turn life’s diary o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find but one word⁠—Nevermore.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="she-came-and-went" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">She Came and Went</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As a twig trembles, which a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lights on to sing, then leaves unbent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is my memory thrilled and stirred;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I only know she came and went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As clasps some lake, by gusts unriven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blue dome’s measureless content⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So my soul held, that moment’s heaven;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I only know she came and went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As, at one bound, our swift spring heaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orchards full of bloom and scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So clove her May my wintry sleeps;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I only know she came and went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An angel stood and met my gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the low doorway of my tent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tent is struck, the vision stays;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I only know she came and went</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, when the room grows slowly dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And life’s last oil is nearly spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One gush of light these eyes will brim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only to think she came and went.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-to-france" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Ode to France</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">February, 1848</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As, flake by flake, the beetling avalanches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Build up their imminent crags of noiseless snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till some chance thrill the loosened ruin launches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In unwarned havoc on the roofs below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So grew and gathered through the silent years</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The madness of a People, wrong by wrong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There seemed no strength in the dumb toiler’s tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No strength in suffering; but the Past was strong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brute despair of trampled centuries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaped up with one hoarse yell and snapped its bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Groped for its right with horny, callous hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stared around for God with bloodshot eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What wonder if those palms were all too hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nice distinctions⁠—if that mænad throng⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They whose thick atmosphere no bard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had shivered with the lightning of his song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brutes with the memories and desires of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose chronicles were writ with iron pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the crooked shoulder and the forehead low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Set wrong to balance wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And physicked woe with woe?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They did as they were taught; not theirs the blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If men who scattered firebrands reaped the flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They trampled Peace beneath their savage feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And by her golden tresses drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mercy along the pavement of the street.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Freedom! Freedom! is thy morning-dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So gory red? Alas, thy light had ne’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Shone in upon the chaos of their lair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They reared to thee such symbol as they knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And worshipped it with flame and blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A Vengeance, axe in hand, that stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding a tyrant’s head up by the clotted hair.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What wrongs the Oppressor suffered, these we know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These have found piteous voice in song and prose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the Oppressed, their darkness and their woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their grinding centuries⁠—what Muse had those?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hall and palace had nor eyes nor ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hardening a people’s heart to senseless stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou knewest them, O Earth, that drank their tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Heaven, that heard their inarticulate moan!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They noted down their fetters, link by link;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coarse was the hand that scrawled, and red the ink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rude was their score, as suits unlettered men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Notched with a headsman’s axe upon a block:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What marvel if, when came the avenging shock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas Atë, not Urania, held the pen?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With eye averted, and an anguished frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loathingly glides the Muse through scenes of strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, like the heart of Vengeance up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throbs in its framework the blood-muffled knife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow are the steps of Freedom, but her feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn never backward: hers no bloody glare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her light is calm, and innocent, and sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where it enters there is no despair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not first on palace and cathedral spire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quivers and gleams that unconsuming fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While these stand black against her morning skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peasant sees it leap from peak to peak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along his hills; the craftsman’s burning eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Own with cool tears its influence mother-meek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lights the poet’s heart up like a star;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! while the tyrant deemed it still afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twined with golden threads his futile snare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That swift, convicting glow all round him ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas close beside him there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunrise whose Memnon is the soul of man.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Broker-King, is this thy wisdom’s fruit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dynasty plucked out as ‘t were a weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grown rankly in a night, that leaves no seed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could eighteen years strike down no deeper root?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now thy vulture eye was turned on Spain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shout from Paris, and thy crown falls off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy race has ceased to reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou become a fugitive and scoff:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slippery the feet that mount by stairs of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weakest of all fences one of steel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go and keep school again like him of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Syracusan tyrant;⁠—thou mayst feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Royal amid a birch-swayed commonweal!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not long can he be ruler who allows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His time to run before him; thou wast naught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the strip of gold about thy brows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was no more emblem of the People’s thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain were thy bayonets against the foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hadst to cope with; thou didst wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>War not with Frenchmen merely;⁠—no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy strife was with the Spirit of the Age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The invisible Spirit whose first breath divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Scattered thy frail endeavor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like poor last year’s leaves, whirled thee and thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Into the Dark forever!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Is here no triumph? Nay, what though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yellow blood of Trade meanwhile should pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along its arteries a shrunken flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the idle canvas droop around the shore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">These do not make a state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Nor keep it great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">I think God made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth for man, not trade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where each humblest human creature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can stand, no more suspicious or afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Erect and kingly in his right of nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heaven and earth knit with harmonious ties⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I behold the exultation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of manhood glowing in those eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That had been dark for ages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or only lit with bestial loves and rages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There I behold a Nation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The France which lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Between the Pyrenees and Rhine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the least part of France;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see her rather in the soul whose shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burns through the craftsman’s grimy countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the new energy divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Toil’s enfranchised glance.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">And if it be a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If the great Future be the little Past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Neath a new mask, which drops and shows at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same weird, mocking face to balk and blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, Muse, a gladder measure suits the theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Tyrtæan harp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Loves notes more resolute and sharp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throbbing, as throbs the bosom, hot and fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such visions are of morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Theirs is no vague forewarning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreams which nations dream come true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And shape the world anew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">If this be a sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Make it long, make it deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Father, who-sendest the harvests men reap!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While Labor so sleepeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">His sorrow is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No longer he weepeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But smileth and steepeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">His thoughts in the dawn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He heareth Hope yonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Rain, lark-like, her fancies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His dreaming hands wander</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Mid heart’s-ease and pansies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘ ’Tis a dream! ’Tis a vision!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Shrieks Mammon aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘The day’s broad derision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Will chase it at last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye are mad, ye have taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A slumbering kraken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For firm land of the Past!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ah! if he awaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">God shield us all then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If this dream rudely shaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Shall cheat him again!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Since first I heard our Northwind blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since first I saw Atlantic throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On our grim rocks his thunderous snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I loved thee, Freedom; as a boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rattle of thy shield at Marathon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Did with a Grecian joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Through all my pulses run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have learned to love thee now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the helm upon thy gleaming brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A maiden mild and undefiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like her who bore the world’s redeeming child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And surely never did thine altars glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With purer fires than now in France;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While, in their clear white flashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wrong’s shadow, backward cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waves cowering o’er the ashes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the dead, blaspheming Past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er the shapes of fallen giants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His own unburied brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose dead hands clench defiance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">At the overpowering Good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down the happy future runs a flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of prophesying light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shows an Earth no longer stained with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blossom and fruit where now we see the bud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of Brotherhood and Right.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="a-parable-said-christ-our-lord-i-will-go-and-see" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Parable</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Said Christ our Lord, ‘I will go and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the men, my brethren, believe in me.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passed not again through the gate of birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But made himself known to the children of earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then said the chief priests, and rulers, and kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Behold, now, the Giver of all good things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go to, let us welcome with pomp and state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him who alone is mighty and great.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With carpets of gold the ground they spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever the Son of Man should tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in palace-chambers lofty and rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lodged him, and served him with kingly fare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Great organs surged through arches dim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their jubilant floods in praise of him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in church, and palace, and judgment-hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw his own image high over all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But still, wherever his steps they led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord in sorrow bent down his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from under the heavy foundation-stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Mary heard bitter groans.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in church, and palace, and judgment-hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He marked great fissures that rent the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opened wider and yet more wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the living foundation heaved and sighed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Have ye founded your thrones and altars, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bodies and souls of living men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think ye that building shall endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shelters the noble and crushes the poor?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘With gates of silver and bars of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye have fenced my sheep from their Father’s fold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have heard the dropping of their tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaven these eighteen hundred years.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘O Lord and Master, not ours the guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We build but as our fathers built;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold thine images, how they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sovereign and sole, through all our land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Our task is hard⁠—with sword and flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hold thine earth forever the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with sharp crooks of steel to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, as thou leftest them, thy sheep.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Christ sought out an artisan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A low-browed, stunted, haggard man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a motherless girl, whose fingers thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pushed from her faintly want and sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These set he in the midst of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as they drew back their garment-hem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fear of defilement, ‘Lo, here,’ said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The images ye have made of me!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-written-for-the-celebration-of-the-introduction-of-the-cochituate-water-into-the-city-of-boston" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Ode</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Written for the Celebration of the Introduction of the Cochituate Water Into the City of Boston</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>My name is Water: I have sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through strange, dark ways, untried before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By pure desire of friendship led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cochituate’s ambassador;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sends four royal gifts by me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long life, health, peace, and purity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’m Ceres’ cup-bearer; I pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For flowers and fruits and all their kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her crystal vintage, from of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stored in old Earth’s selectest bin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flora’s Falernian ripe, since God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine-press of the deluge trod.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In that far isle whence, iron-willed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The New World’s sires their bark unmoored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairies’ acorn-cups I filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the toadstool’s silver board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, ’neath Herne’s oak, for Shakespeare’s sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strewed moss and grass with diamonds bright.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No fairies in the Mayflower came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lightsome as I sparkle here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Mother Bay State, busy dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ve toiled and drudged this many a year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throbbed in her engines’ iron veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twirled myriad spindles for her gains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I, too, can weave: the warp I set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which the sun his shuttle throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, bright as Noah saw it, yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For you the arching rainbow glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sight in Paradise denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To unfallen Adam and his bride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Winter held me in his grip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You seized and sent me o’er the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ungrateful! in a prison-ship;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I forgive, not long a slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, soon as summer south-winds blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward I fled, disguised as dew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For countless services I’m fit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of use, of pleasure, and of gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lightly from all bonds I flit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lose my mirth, nor feel a stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mill and wash-tub I escape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take in heaven my proper shape.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, free myself, to-day, elate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I come from far o’er hill and mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here, Cochituate’s envoy, wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be your blithesome Ganymede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brim your cups with nectar true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never will make slaves of you.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lines" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Lines</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Suggested by the Graves of Two English Soldiers on Concord Battle-Ground</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The same good blood that now refills</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dotard Orient’s shrunken veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same whose vigor westward thrills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bursting Nevada’s silver chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured here upon the April grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freckled with red the herbage new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On reeled the battle’s trampling mass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Back to the ash the bluebird flew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>poured here in vain;⁠—that sturdy blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>was meant to make the earth more green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>but in a higher, gentler mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>than broke this april noon serene;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>two graves are here: to mark the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>at head and foot, an unhewn stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>o’er which the herald lichens trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>the blazon of oblivion.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>these men were brave enough, and true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>to the hired soldier’s bull-dog creed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>what brought them here they never knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>they fought as suits the english breed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>they came three thousand miles, and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>to keep the past upon its throne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>unheard, beyond the ocean tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>their english mother made her moan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>the turf that covers them no thrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>sends up to fire the heart and brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>no stronger purpose nerves the will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>no hope renews its youth again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>from farm to farm the concord glides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>and trails my fancy with its flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>o’erhead the balanced hen-hawk slides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>twinned in the river’s heaven below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>but go, whose bay state bosom stirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>proud of thy birth and neighbor’s right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>where sleep the heroic villagers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>borne red and stiff from concord fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>thought reuben, snatching down his gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>or seth, as ebbed the life away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>what earthquake rifts would shoot and run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>world-wide from that short april fray?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>what then? with heart and hand they wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>according to their village light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’twas for the future that they fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>their rustic faith in what was right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>upon earth’s tragic stage they burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>unsummoned, in the humble sock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>theirs the fifth act; the curtain first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>rose long ago on charles’s block.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>their graves have voices; if they threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>dice charged with fates beyond their ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>yet to their instincts they were true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>and had the genius to be men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>fine privilege of freedom’s host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>of humblest soldiers for the right!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>age after age ye hold your post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>your graves send courage forth, and might.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To⁠⸺⁠</h2>
			<p>
				<span>We, too, have autumns, when our leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drop loosely through the dampened air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all our good seems bound in sheaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we stand reaped and bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our seasons have no fixed returns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without our will they come and go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At noon our sudden summer burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere sunset all is snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But each day brings less summer cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crimps more our ineffectual spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something earlier every year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our singing birds take wing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As less the olden glow abides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And less the chillier heart aspires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With drift-wood beached in past spring-tides</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We light our sullen fires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the pinched rushlight’s starving beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We cower and strain our wasted sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stitch youth’s shroud up, seam by seam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the long arctic night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was not so⁠—we once were young</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Spring, to womanly Summer turning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her dew-drops on each grass-blade strung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the red sunrise burning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We trusted then, aspired, believed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That earth could be remade to-morrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, why be ever undeceived?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why give up faith for sorrow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O thou, whose days are yet all spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faith, blighted one, is past retrieving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Experience is a dumb, dead thing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The victory’s in believing.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="freedom" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Freedom</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Are we, then, wholly fallen? Can it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou, North wind, that from thy mountains bringest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their spirit to our plains, and thou, blue sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who on our rocks thy wreaths of freedom flingest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on an altar⁠—can it be that ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have wasted inspiration on dead ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dulled with the too familiar clank of chains?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people’s heart is like a harp for years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung where some petrifying torrent rains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its slow-incrusting spray: the stiffened chords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faint and more faint make answer to the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drip upon them: idle are all words:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a golden plectrum wakes the tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep buried ’neath that ever-thickening stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We are not free: doth Freedom, then, consist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In musing with our faces toward the Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While petty cares and crawling interests twist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their spider-threads about us, which at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow strong as iron chains, to cramp and bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In formal narrowness heart, soul and mind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom is re-created year by year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hearts wide open on the Godward side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In souls calm-cadenced as the whirling sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In minds that sway the future like a tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He broadest creeds can hold her, and no codes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She chooses men for her august abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Building them fair and fronting to the dawn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, when we seek her, we but find a few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light footprints, leading mornward through the dew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the day had risen, she was gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And we must follow: swiftly runs she on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if our steps should slacken in despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half turns her face, half smiles through golden hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever yielding, never wholly won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is not love which pauses in the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two close-linked names on fleeting sand to trace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom gained yesterday is no more ours;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men gather but dry seeds of last year’s flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still there’s a charm uugranted, still a grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still rosy Hope, the free, the unattained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes us Possession’s languid hand let fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis but a fragment of ourselves is gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Future brings us more, but never all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as the finder of some unknown realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounting a summit whence he thinks to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side of him the imprisoning sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholds, above the clouds that overwhelm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valley-land, peak after snowy peak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch out of sight, each like a silver helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath its plume of smoke, sublime and bleak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what he thought an island finds to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A continent to him first oped⁠—so we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can from our height of Freedom look along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boundless future, ours if we be strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if we shrink, better remount our ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, fleeing God’s express design, trace back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero-freighted Mayflower’s prophet-track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Europe entering her blood-red eclipse.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore of Europe now I will not doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the broad foreheads surely win the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brains, not crowns or soul-gelt armies, weigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Fortune’s scales: such dust she brushes out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most gracious are the conquests of the Word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gradual and silent as a flower’s increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the best guide from old to new is Peace⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, Freedom, than canst sanctify the sword!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bravely to do whate’er the time demands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether with pen or sword, and not to flinch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the task that fits heroic hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So are Truth’s boundaries widened inch by inch.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I do not love the Peace which tyrants make;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The calm she breeds let the sword’s lightning break!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is the tyrants who have beaten out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ploughshares and pruning-hooks to spears and swords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall I pause and moralize and doubt?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose veins run water let him mete his words!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each fetter sundered is the whole world’s gain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rather than humanity remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pearl beneath the feet of Austrian swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome to me whatever breaks a chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>That</i> surely is of God, and all divine!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bibliolatres" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bibliolatres</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Bowing thyself in dust before a Book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thinking the great God is thine alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O rash iconoclast, thou wilt not brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What gods the heathen carves in wood and stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the Shepherd who from the outer cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads all his shivering lambs to one sure fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were careful for the fashion of his crook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There is no broken reed so poor and base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rush, the bending tilt of swamp-fly blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But He therewith the ravening wolf can chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guide his flock to springs and pastures new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through ways unloosed for, and through many lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the rich folds built with human hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gracious footprints of his love I trace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And what art thou, own brother of the clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from his hand the crook wouldst snatch away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shake instead thy dry and sapless rod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scare the sheep out of the wholesome day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, what art thou, blind, unconverted Jew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with thy idol-volume’s covers two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst make a jail to coop the living God?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou hear’st not well the mountain organ-tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By prophet ears from Hor and Sinai caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking the cisterns of those Hebrew brains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew dry the springs of the All-knower’s thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall thy lips be touched with living fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who blow’st old altar-coals with sole desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To weld anew the spirit’s broken chains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God is not dumb, that He should speak no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou hast wanderings in the wilderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find’st not Sinai, ’tis thy soul is poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There towers the Mountain of the Voice no less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which whoso seeks shall find, but he who bends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intent on manna still and mortal ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees it not, neither hears its thundered lore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Slowly the Bible of the race is writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not on paper leaves nor leaves of stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each age, each kindred, adds a verse to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Texts of despair or hope, of joy or moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While swings the sea, while mists the mountains shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thunder’s surges burst on cliffs and cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still at the prophets’ feet the nations sit.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="beaver-brook" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Beaver Brook</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hushed with broad sunlight lies the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, minuting the long day’s loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cedar’s shadow, slow and still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Creeps o’er its dial of gray moss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Warm noon brims full the valley’s cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The aspen’s leaves are scarce astir;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the little mill sends up</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its busy, never-ceasing burr.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Climbing the loose-piled wall that hems</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The road along the mill-pond’s brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ’neath the arching barberry-stems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My footstep scares the shy chewink.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beneath a bony buttonwood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mill’s red door lets forth the din;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whitened miller, dust-imbued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flits past the square of dark within.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No mountain torrent’s strength is here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet Beaver, child of forest still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaps its small pitcher to the ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gently waits the miller’s will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swift slips Undine along the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unheard, and then, with flashing bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floods the dull wheel with light and grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, laughing, hunts the loath drudge round.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The miller dreams not at what cost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The quivering millstones hum and whirl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how for every turn are tost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armfuls of diamond and of pearl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Summer cleared my happier eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With drops of some celestial juice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see how Beauty underlies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forevermore each form of use.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And more; methought I saw that flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which now so dull and darkling steals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick, here and there, with human blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To turn the world’s laborious wheels.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No more than doth the miller there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shut in our several cells, do we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know with what waste of beauty rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moves every day’s machinery.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Surely the wiser time shall come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When this fine overplus of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer sullen, slow, and dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall leap to music and to light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In that new childhood of the Earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life of itself shall dance and play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh blood in Time’s shrunk veins make mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And labor meet delight halfway.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="kossuth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Kossuth</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A race of nobles may die out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A royal line may leave no heir;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise Nature sets no guards about</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her pewter plate and wooden ware.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But they fail not, the kinglier breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who starry diadems attain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dungeon, axe, and stake succeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heirs of the old heroic strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The zeal of Nature never cools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is she thwarted of her ends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When gapped and dulled her cheaper tools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then she a saint and prophet spends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Land of the Magyars! though it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tyrant may relink his chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already thine the victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the just Future measures gain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou hast succeeded, thou hast won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deathly travail’s amplest worth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nation’s duty thou hast done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Giving a hero to our earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And he, let come what will of woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath saved the land he strove to save;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Cossack hordes, no traitor’s blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can quench the voice shall haunt his grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘I Kossuth am: O Future, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That clear’st the just and blott’st the vile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er this small dust in reverence bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remembering what I was erewhile.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘I was the chosen trump wherethrough</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our God sent forth awakening breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came chains? Came death? The strain He blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounds on, outliving chains and death.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-lamartine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Lamartine</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">1848</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I did not praise thee when the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">‘Witched with the moment’s inspiration,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vexed thy still ether with hosannas loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And stamped their dusty adoration;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I but looked upward with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when they shouted Greatest, whispered Best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They raised thee not, but rose to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their fickle wreaths about thee flinging;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on some marble Phoebus the swol’n sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Might leave his worthless seaweed clinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But pious hands, with reverent care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the pure limbs once more sublimely bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now thou’rt thy plain, grand self again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou art secure from panegyric,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who gav’st politics an epic strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And actedst Freedom’s noblest lyric;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This side the Blessed Isles, no tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows green enough to make a wreath for thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor can blame cling to thee; the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From swinish footprints takes no staining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, leaving the gross soils of earth below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Its spirit mounts, the skies regaining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And unresentful falls again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beautify the world with dews and rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The highest duty to mere man vouchsafed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was laid on thee⁠—out of wild chaos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the roused popular ocean foamed and chafed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And vulture War from his Imaus</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Snuffed blood, to summon homely Peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And show that only order is release.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To carve thy fullest thought, what though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Time was not granted? Aye in history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like that Dawn’s face which baffled Angelo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Left shapeless, grander for its mystery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy great Design shall stand, and day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flood its blind front from Orients far away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who says thy day is o’er? Control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">My heart, that bitter first emotion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While men shall reverence the steadfast soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The heart in silent self-devotion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breaking, the mild, heroic mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou’lt need no prop of marble, Lamartine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If France reject thee, ’tis not thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But her own, exile that she utters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ideal France, the deathless, the divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Will be where thy white pennon flutters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As once the nobler Athens went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Aristides into banishment.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No fitting metewand hath To-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For measuring spirits of thy stature;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the Future can reach up to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The laurel on that lofty nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bard, who with some diviner art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast touched the bard’s true lyre, a nation’s heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swept by thy hand, the gladdened chords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Crashed now in discords fierce by others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave forth one note beyond all skill of words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And chimed together, We are brothers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O poem unsurpassed! it ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All round the world, unlocking man to man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>France is too poor to pay alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The service of that ample spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paltry seem low dictatorship and throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Weighed with thy self-renouncing merit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They had to thee been rust and loss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy aim was higher⁠—thou hast climbed a Cross!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-john-gorham-palfrey" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To John Gorham Palfrey</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There are who triumph in a losing cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can put on defeat, as ’twere a wreath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwithering in the adverse popular breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe from the blasting demagogue’s applause;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis they who stand for Freedom and God’s laws.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so stands Palfrey now, as Marvell stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loyal to Truth dethroned, nor could be wooed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To trust the playful tiger’s velvet paws:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if the second Charles brought in decay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of ancient virtue, if it well might wring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls that had broadened ’neath a nobler day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see a losel, marketable king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearfully watering with his realm’s best blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cromwell’s quenched bolts, that erst had cracked and flamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scaring, through all their depths of courtier mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Europe’s crowned bloodsuckers⁠—how more ashamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ought we to be, who see Corruption’s flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still rise o’er last year’s mark, to mine away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our brazen idol’s feet of treacherous clay!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O utter degradation! Freedom turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slavery’s vile bawd, to cozen and betray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the old lecher’s clutch a maiden prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so a loathsome pander’s fee be earned!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we are silent⁠—we who daily tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soil sublime, at least, with heroes’ graves!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beckon no more, shades of the noble dead!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be dumb, ye heaven-touched lips of winds and waves!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or hope to rouse some Coptic dullard, hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages ago, wrapt stiffly, fold on fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cerements close, to wither in the cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forever hushed, and sunless pyramid!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Beauty and Truth, and all that these contain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop not like ripened fruit about our feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We climb to them through years of sweat and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without long struggle, none did e’er attain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The downward look from Quiet’s blissful seat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though present loss may be the hero’s part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet none can rob him of the victor heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby the broad-realmed future is subdued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Wrong, which now insults from triumph’s car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sending her vulture hope to raven far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is made unwilling tributary of Good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Mother State, how quenched thy Sinai fires!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is there none left of thy stanch Mayflower breed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No spark among the ashes of thy sires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Virtue’s altar-flame the kindling seed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are these thy great men, these that cringe and creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And writhe through slimy ways to place and power?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How long, O Lord, before thy wrath shall reap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our frail-stemmed summer prosperings in their flower?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh for one hour of that undaunted stock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That went with Vane and Sidney to the block!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh for a whiff of Naseby, that would sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its stern Puritan besom, all this chaff</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the Lord’s threshing-floor! Yet more than half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory is attained, when one or two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the fool’s laughter and the traitor’s scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside thy sepulchre can bide the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crucified Truth, when thou shalt rise anew.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-w-l-garrison" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To W. L. Garrison</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>‘Some time afterward, it was reported to me by the city officers that they had ferreted out the paper and its editor; that his office was an obscure hole, his only visible auxiliary a negro boy, and his supporters a few very insignificant persons of all colors.’</p>
					<cite>—⁠<i>Letter of H. G. Otis</i>.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>In a small chamber, friendless and unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Toiled o’er his types one poor, unlearned young man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place was dark, unfurnitured, and mean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet there the freedom of a race began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Help came but slowly; surely no man yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put lever to the heavy world with less:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What need of help? He knew how types were set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had a dauntless spirit, and a press.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such earnest natures are the fiery pith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The compact nucleus, round which systems grow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mass after mass becomes inspired therewith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whirls impregnate with the central glow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Truth! O Freedom! how are ye still born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the rude stable, in the manger nurst!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What humble hands unbar those gates of morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which the splendors of the New Day burst!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What! shall one monk, scarce known beyond his cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Front Rome’s far-reaching bolts, and scorn her frown?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Luther answered <strong>yes</strong>; that thunder’s swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rocked Europe, and discharmed the triple crown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whatever can be known of earth we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sneered Europe’s wise men, in their snail-shells curled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No! said one man in Genoa, and that No</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the darkness summoned this New World.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who is it will not dare himself to trust?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is it hath not strength to stand alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is it thwarts and bilks the inward <strong>must</strong>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He and his works, like sand, from earth are blown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men of a thousand shifts and wiles, look here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See one straightforward conscience put in pawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win a world; see the obedient sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By bravery’s simple gravitation drawn!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall we not heed the lesson taught of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the Present’s lips repeated still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our own single manhood to be bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fortressed in conscience and impregnable will?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We stride the river daily at its spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, in our childless thoughtlessness, foresee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What myriad vassal streams shall tribute bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How like an equal it shall greet the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O small beginnings, ye are great and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Based on a faithful heart and weariless brain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye build the future fair, ye conquer wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye earn the crown, and wear it not in vain.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-memory-of-hood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Memory of Hood</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Another star ’neath Time’s horizon dropped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gleam o’er unknown lands and seas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another heart that beat for freedom stopped⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What mournful words are these!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Love Divine, that claspest our tired earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lullest it upon thy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest how much a gentle soul is worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To teach men what thou art!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His was a spirit that to all thy poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was kind as slumber after pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why ope so soon thy heaven-deep Quiet’s door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And call him home again?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Freedom needs all her poets: it is they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who give her aspirations wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the wiser law of music sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her wild imaginings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet thou hast called him, nor art thou unkind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Love Divine, for ’tis thy will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gracious natures leave their love behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To work for Mercy still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let laurelled marbles weigh on other tombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let anthems peal for other dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustling the bannered depth of minster-glooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With their exulting spread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His epitaph shall mock the short-lived stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No lichen shall its lines efface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He needs these few and simple lines alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mark his resting-place:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Here lies a Poet. Stranger, if to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His claim to memory be obscure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wouldst learn how truly great was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go, ask it of the poor.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-this-true-nobleness-i-seek-in-vain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">For This True Nobleness I Seek in Vain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>‘For this true nobleness I seek in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In woman and in man I find it not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I almost weary of my earthly lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My life-springs are dried up with burning pain.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou find’st it not? I pray thee look again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look <i>inward</i> through the depths of thine own soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How is it with thee? Art thou sound and whole?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth narrow search show thee no earthly stain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span><strong>Be noble</strong>! and the nobleness that lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In other men, sleeping, but never dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will rise in majesty to meet thine own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wilt thou see it gleam in many eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will pure light around thy path be shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou wilt nevermore be sad and lone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lenvoi" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">L’Envoi</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Whether my heart hath wiser grown or not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these three years, since I to thee inscribed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine own betrothed, the firstlings of my muse.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor windfalls of unripe experience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young buds plucked hastily by childish hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not patient to await more full-blown flowers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least it hath seen more of life and men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pondered more, and grown a shade more sad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet with no loss of hope or settled trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the benignness of that Providence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shapes from out our elements awry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grace and order that we wonder at,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystic harmony of right and wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both working out his wisdom and our good:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A trust, Beloved, chiefly learned of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hast that gift of patient tenderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The instinctive wisdom of a woman’s heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They tell us that our land was made for song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its huge rivers and sky-piercing peaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its sealike lakes and mighty cataracts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its forests vast and hoar, and prairies wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mounds that tell of wondrous tribes extinct.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Poesy springs not from rocks and woods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her womb and cradle are the human heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she can find a nobler theme for song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the most loathsome man that blasts the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in the broad expanse of sea and shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the frozen deserts of the poles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nations have their message from on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each the messiah of some central thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fulfilment and delight of Man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One has to teach that labor is divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another Freedom; and another Mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all, that God is open-eyed and just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happy centre and calm heart of all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Are, then, our woods, our mountains, and our streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Needful to teach our poets how to sing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O maiden rare, far other thoughts were ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we have sat by ocean’s foaming marge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watched the waves leap roaring on the rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than young Leander and his Hero had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing from Sestos to the other shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon looks down and ocean worships her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stars rise and set, and seasons come and go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as they did in Homer’s elder time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we behold them not with Grecian eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then they were types of beauty and of strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now of freedom, unconflned and pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subject alone to Order’s higher law.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What cares the Russian serf or Southern slave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though we should speak as man spake never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gleaming Hudson’s broad magnificence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or green Niagara’s never-ending roar?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our country hath a gospel of her own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To preach and practise before all the world⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freedom and divinity of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious claims of human brotherhood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which to pay nobly, as a freeman should,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gains the sole wealth that will not fly away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the soul’s fealty to none but God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are realities, which make the shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of outward Nature, be they ne’er so grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem small, and worthless, and contemptible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are the mountain-summits for our bards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which stretch far upward into heaven itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give such widespread and exulting view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hope, and faith, and onward destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shrunk Parnassus to a molehill dwindles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our new Atlantis, like a morning-star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silvers the mirk face of slow-yielding Night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald of a fuller truth than yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath gleamed upon the upraised face of Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the earth glittered in her stainless prime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a more glorious sunrise than of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew wondrous melodies from Memnon huge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, draws them still, though now he sit waist-deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the ingulfing flood of whirling sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And look across the wastes of endless gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole wreck, where once his hundred-gated Thebes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pained with her mighty hum the calm, blue heaven:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the dull stone pay grateful orisons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we till noonday bar the splendor out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest it reproach and chide our sluggard hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm-nestled in the down of Prejudice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be content, though clad with angel-wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close-clipped, to hop about from perch to perch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In paltry cages of dead men’s dead thoughts?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, rather, like the skylark, soar and sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let our gushing songs befit the dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sunrise, and the yet unshaken dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brimming the chalice of each full-blown hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose blithe front turns to greet the growing day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never had poets such high call before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never can poets hope for higher one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if they be but faithful to their trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth will remember them with love and joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oh, far better, God will not forget.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he who settles Freedom’s principles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writes the death-warrant of all tyranny;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who speaks the truth stabs Falsehood to the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his mere word makes despots tremble more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than ever Brutus with his dagger could.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait for no hints from waterfalls or woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dream that tales of red men, brute and fierce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repay the finding of this Western World,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or needed half the globe to give them birth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit supreme of Freedom! not for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did great Columbus tame his eagle soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To jostle with the daws that perch in courts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for this, friendless, on an unknown sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coping with mad waves and more mutinous spirits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Battled he with the dreadful ache at heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which tempts, with devilish subtleties of doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hermit, of that loneliest solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silent desert of a great New Thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though loud Niagara were to-day struck dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would this cataract of boiling life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush plunging on and on to endless deeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And utter thunder till the world shall cease⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thunder worthy of the poet’s song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which alone can fill it with true life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high evangel to our country granted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could make apostles, yea, with tongues of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hearts half-darkened back again to clay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the soul only that is national,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who pays true loyalty to that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone can claim the wreath of patriotism.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Beloved! if I wander far and oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that which I believe, and feel, and know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt forgive, not with a sorrowing heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with a strengthened hope of better things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing that I, though often blind and false</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those I love, and oh, more false than all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto myself, have been most true to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that whoso in one thing hath been true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can be as true in all. Therefore thy hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May yet not prove unfruitful, and thy love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet, day by day, with less unworthy thanks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether, as now, we journey hand in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, parted in the body, yet are one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spirit and the love of holy things.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-unhappy-lot-of-mr-knott" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Unhappy Lot of Mr. Knott</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Showing how he built his house and his wife moved into it</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My worthy friend, A. Gordon Knott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From business snug withdrawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was much contented with a lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would contain a Tudor cot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt twelve feet square of garden-plot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twelve feet more of lawn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had laid business on the shelf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give his taste expansion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, since no man, retired with pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The building mania can shun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knott, being middle-aged himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolved to build (unhappy elf!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mediæval mansion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He called an architect in counsel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘I want,’ said he, ‘a⁠—you know what,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(You are a builder, I am Knott)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing complete from chimney-pot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the very grounsel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here’s a half-acre of good land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just have it nicely mapped and planned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make your workmen drive on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meadow there is, and upland too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I should like a water-view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>D’you think you could contrive one?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Perhaps the pump and trough would do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If painted a judicious blue?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woodland I’ve attended to;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">[He meant three pines stuck up askew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two dead ones and a live one.]</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘A pocket-full of rocks ’twould take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To build a house of freestone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then it is not hard to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What nowadays is <i>the</i> stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cunning painter in a trice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your house’s outside petrifies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And people think it very gneiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without inquiring deeper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>My</i> money never shall be thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Away on such a deal of stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When stone of deal is cheaper.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so the greenest of antiques</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was reared for Knott to dwell in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The architect worked hard for weeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In venting all his private peaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the roof, whose crop of leaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had satisfied Fluellen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever anybody had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the common, good or bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knott had it all worked well in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A donjon-keep, where clothes might dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A porter’s lodge that was a sty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A campanile slim and high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too small to hang a bell in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All up and down and here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Lord-knows-whats of round and square</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck on at random everywhere⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a house to make one stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All corners and all gables;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like dogs let loose upon a bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten emulous styles <i>staboyed</i> with care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole among them seemed to tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the oddities to spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were set upon the stables.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Knott was delighted with a pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approved by fashion’s leaders:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Only he made the builder smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By asking every little while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why that was called the Twodoor style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which certainly had <i>three</i> doors?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet better for this luckless man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he had put a downright ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the thing <i>in limine;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though to quit affairs his plan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere many days, poor Knott began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perforce accepting draughts, that ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All ways⁠—except up chimney;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house, though painted stone to mock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nice white lines round every block,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some trepidation stood in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When tempests (with petrific shock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to speak,) made it really rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though not a whit less wooden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And painted stone, howe’er well done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not take in the prodigal sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose beams are never quite at one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With our terrestrial lumber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the wood shrank around the knots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gaped in disconcerting spots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there were lots of dots and rots</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crannies without number,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherethrough, as you may well presume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind, like water through a flume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came rushing in ecstatic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving, in all three floors, no room</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was not a rheumatic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, what with points and squares and rounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grown shaky on their poises,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house at nights was full of pounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thumps, bumps, creaks, scratchings, raps⁠—till⁠—‘Zounds!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried Knott, ‘this goes beyond all bounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not deal in tongues and sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor have I let my house and grounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a family of Noyeses!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, though Knott’s house was full of airs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>He</i> had but one⁠—a daughter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as he owned much stocks and shares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many who wished to render theirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such vain, unsatisfying cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And needed wives to sew their tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In matrimony sought her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They vowed her gold they wanted not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their faith would never falter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They longed to tie this single Knott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the Hymeneal halter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So daily at the door they rang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cards for the belle delivering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the choir at her they sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achieving such a rapturous twang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As set her nerves ashivering.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now Knott had quite made up his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Colonel Jones should have her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No beauty he, but oft we find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet kernels ’neath a roughish rind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hoped his Jenny’d be resigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make no more palaver;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glanced at the fact that love was blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That girls were ratherish inclined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pet their little crosses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then nosologically defined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rate at which the system pined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In those unfortunates who dined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon that metaphoric kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dish⁠—their own proboscis.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, with many tears and moans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought him not to mock her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said ’twas too much for flesh and bones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To marry mortgages and loans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fathers’ hearts were stocks and stones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that she’d go, when Mrs. Jones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Davy Jones’s locker;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gave her head a little toss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That said as plain as ever was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If men are always at a loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mere womankind to bridle⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To try the thing on woman cross</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were fifty times as idle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she a strict resolve had made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And registered in private,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That either she would die a maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else be Mrs. Doctor Slade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If a woman could contrive it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though the wedding-day was set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jenny was more so, rather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declaring, in a pretty pet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, howsoe’er they spread their net,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would out-Jennyral them yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The colonel and her father.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Just at this time the Public’s eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were keenly on the watch, a stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beginning slowly to arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About those questions and replies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those raps that unwrapped mysteries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So rapidly at Rochester,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Knott, already nervous grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By lying much awake alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And listening, sometimes to a moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sometimes to a clatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er the wind at night would rouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gingerbread-work on his house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or when some, hasty-tempered mouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the plastering, made a towse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About a family matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to wonder if his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A paralytic half her life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made it more surprising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might not, to rule him from her urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have taken a peripatetic turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want of exorcising.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This thought, once nestled in his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Erelong contagious grew, and spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infecting all his mind with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until at last he lay in bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard his wife, with well-known tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entering the kitchen through the shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Or was’t his fancy, mocking?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opening the pantry, cutting bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then (she’d been some ten years dead)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Closets and drawers unlocking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, in his room (his breath grew thick)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard the long-familiar click</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of slender needles flying quick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she knit a stocking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom?⁠—he prayed that years might flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pains rheumatic shooting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before those ghostly things she knit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his unfleshed sole might fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did not fancy it a bit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stand upon that footing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At other times, his frightened hairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the bedclothes trusting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard her, full of household cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(No dream entrapped in supper’s snares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foal of horrible nightmares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But broad awake, as he declares),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go bustling up and down the stairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or setting back last evening’s chairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or with the poker thrusting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The raked-up sea-coal’s hardened crust⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—what! impossible! it must!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew she had returned to dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet could scarce his senses trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing her as she poked and fussed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the parlor, dusting!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Night after night he strove to sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take his ease in spite of it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still his flesh would chill and creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though two night-lamps he might keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not so make light of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, quite desperate, he goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tells his neighbors all his woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did but their amount enhance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They made such mockery of his fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soon his days were of all jeers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nights of the rueful countenance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘I thought most folks,’ one neighbor said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Gave up the ghost when they were dead?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another gravely shook his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adding, ‘From all we hear, it’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite plain poor Knott is going mad⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For how can he at once be sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And think he’s full of spirits?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third declared he knew a knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would cut this Knott much quicker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘The surest way to end all strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay the spirit of a wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is just to take and lick her!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A temperance man caught up the word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ah yes,’ he groaned, ‘I’ve always heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our poor friend somewhat slanted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tow’rd taking liquor overmuch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear these spirits may be Dutch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A sort of gins, or something such,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his house is haunted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the thing as clear as light⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Knott would give up getting tight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Naught farther would be wanted:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all his neighbors stood aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, that the spirits ’neath his roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were not entirely up to proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unanimously granted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Knott knew that cocks and sprites were foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so bought up, Heaven only knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many, for he wanted crows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give ghosts caws, as I suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think that day was breaking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moreover what he called his park,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He turned into a kind of ark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dogs, because a little bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a good tonic in the dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If one is given to waking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But things went on from bad to worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His curs were nothing but a curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, what was still more shocking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foul ghosts of living fowl made scoff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would not think of going off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In spite of all his cocking.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shanghais, Bucks-counties, Dominiques,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Malays (that didn’t lay for weeks),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Polanders, Bantams, Dorkings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Waiving the cost, no trifling ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since each brought in his little bill,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By day or night were never still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every thought of rest would kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cacklings and with quorkings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henry the Eighth of wives got free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a way he had of axing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But poor Knott’s Tudor henery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not so fortunate, and he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still found his trouble waxing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for the dogs, the rows they made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how they howled, snarled, barked and bayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond all human knowledge is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night, as wide awake as gnats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The terriers rumpused after rats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, just for practice, taught their brats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To worry cast-off shoes and hats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bull-dogs settled private spats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All chased imaginary cats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or raved behind the fence’s slats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At real ones, or, from their mats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With friends, miles off, held pleasant chats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, like some folks in white cravats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contemptuous of sharps and flats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sat up and sang dogsologies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile the cats set up a squall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, safe upon the garden-wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night kept cat-a-walling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the feline race were all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one wild cataleptic sprawl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into love’s tortures falling.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Showing what is meant by a flow of spirits</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At first the ghosts were somewhat shy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming when none but Knott was nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And people said ’twas all their eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or rather his) a flam, the sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Digestion’s machination:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some recommended a wet sheet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some a nice broth of pounded peat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some a cold flat-iron to the feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some a decoction of lamb’s-bleat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some a southwesterly grain of wheat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meat was by some pronounced unmeet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others thought fish most indiscreet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that ’twas worse than all to eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vegetables, sour or sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Except, perhaps, the skin of beet,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such a concatenation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One quack his button gently plucks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmurs, ‘Biliary ducks!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Says Knott, ‘I never ate one;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all, though brimming full of wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homoeo, Allo, Hydropath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Concurred in this⁠—that t’other’s path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To death’s door was the straight one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still, spite of medical advice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ghosts came thicker, and a spice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mischief grew apparent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did they only come at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But seemed to fancy broad daylight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Knott, in horror and affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His unoffending hair rent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er with handkerchief on lap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made his elbow-chair a trap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch an after-dinner nap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirits, always on the tap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would make a sudden <i>rap, rap, rap,</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The half-spun cord of sleep to snap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And what is life without its nap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But threadbareness and mere mishap?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ’twere with a percussion cap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trouble’s climax capping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed a party dried and grim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mummies had come to visit him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each getting off from every limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its multitudinous wrapping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scratchings sometimes the walls ran round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The merest penny-weights of sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes ’twas only by the pound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They carried on their dealing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thumping ’neath the parlor floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thump-bump-thump-bumping o’er and o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the vegetables in store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Quiet and orderly before)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were all together peeling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You would have thought the thing was done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the spirit of some son of a gun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that a forty-two-pounder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that the ghost which made such sounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could be none other than John Pounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Ragged Schools the founder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through three gradations of affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The awful noises reached their height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At first they knocked nocturnally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, for some reason, changing quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As mourners, after six months’ flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn suddenly from dark to light,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to knock diurnally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, combining all their stocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Scotland was ne’er so full of Knox,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into one Chaos (father of Nox,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Nocte pluit</i>⁠—they showered knocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knocked, knocked, knocked, eternally;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever upon the go, like buoys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Wooden sea-urchins,) all Knott’s joys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They turned to troubles and a noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That preyed on him internally.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon they grew wider in their scope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenever Knott a door would ope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would ope not, or else elope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fly back (curbless as a trope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once started down a stanza’s slope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a bard that gave it too much rope⁠—)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a clap of thunder slamming:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when kind Jenny brought his hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(She always, when he walked, did that,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as upon his heart it sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Submitting to his settling pat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some unseen hand would jam it flat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or give it such a furious bat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That eyes and nose went cramming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up out of sight, and consequently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when in life it paddled free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His beaver caused much damning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If these things seem o’erstrained to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read the account of Doctor Dee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis in our college library:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read Wesley’s circumstantial plea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mrs. Crowe, more like a bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sucking the nightshade’s honeyed fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Stilling’s Pneumatology;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consult Scot, Glanvil, grave Wie-</span>
					<br/>
					<span>rus and both Mathers; further see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Webster, Casaubon, James First’s trea-</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tise, a right royal Q.E.D.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writ with the moon in perigee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bodin de la Demonomanie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Accent that last line gingerly)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All full of learning as the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fishes, and all disagree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save in <i>Sathanas apage!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, what will surely put a flea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In unbelieving ears⁠—with glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of a paper (sent to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By some friend who forgot to P⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A⁠ ⁠… Y⁠ ⁠… —I use cryptography</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest I his vengeful pen should dree⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His P⁠ ⁠… O⁠ ⁠… S⁠ ⁠… T⁠ ⁠… A⁠ ⁠… G⁠ ⁠… E⁠ ⁠…)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things to the same effect I cut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the tantrums of a ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not more than three weeks since, at most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near Stratford, in Connecticut.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knott’s Upas daily spread its roots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent up on all sides livelier shoots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bore more pestilential fruits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ghosts behaved like downright brutes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They snipped holes in his Sunday suits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Practised all night on octave flutes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put peas (not peace) into his boots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof grew corns in season,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They scotched his sheets, and, what was worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck his silk nightcap full of burrs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he, in language plain and terse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(But much unlike a Bible verse,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swore he should lose his reason.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The tables took to spinning, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perpetual yarns, and arm-chairs grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prophets and apostles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One footstool vowed that only he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of law and gospel held the key,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That teachers of whate’er degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom opinion bows the knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weren’t fit to teach Truth’s <i>a b c</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were (the whole lot) to a T</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mere fogies all and fossils;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A teapoy, late the property</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Knox’s Aunt Keziah,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Whom Jenny most irreverently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had nicknamed her aunt-tipathy)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tips emphatic claimed to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prophet Jeremiah;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tins upon the kitchen-wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turned tintinnabulators all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And things that used to come to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For simple household services</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to hop and whirl and prance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit to put out of countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <i>Commís</i> and <i>Grisettes</i> of France</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Turkey’s dancing Dervises.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of course such doings, far and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rumors filled the countryside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (as it is our nation’s pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think a Truth not verified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till with majorities allied)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parties sprung up, affirmed, denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And candidates with questions plied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, like the circus-riders, tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once both hobbies to bestride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each with his opponent vied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In being inexplicit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earnest inquirers multiplied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Folks, whose tenth cousins lately died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrote letters long, and Knott replied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All who could either walk or ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gathered to wonder or deride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And paid the house a visit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horses were to his pine-trees tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourners in every corner sighed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Widows brought children there that cried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swarms of lean Seekers, eager-eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(People Knott never could abide,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into each hole and cranny pried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With strings of questions cut and dried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the Devout Inquirer’s Guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the wise spirits to decide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, for example, is it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True that the damned are fried or boiled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the Earth’s axis greased or oiled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cleaned the moon when it was soiled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How baldness might be cured or foiled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How heal diseased potatoes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did spirits have the sense of smell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where would departed spinsters dwell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the late Zenas Smith were well?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Earth were solid or a shell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were spirits fond of Doctor Fell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Did</i> the bull toll Cock-Robin’s knell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What remedy would bugs expel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Paine’s invention were a sell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did spirits by Webster’s system spell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it a sin to be a belle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did dancing sentence folks to hell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If so, then where most torture fell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On little toes or great toes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If life’s true seat were in the brain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Ensign mean to marry Jane?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whom, in fact, was Morgan slain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could matter ever suffer pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What would take out a cherry-stain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who picked the pocket of Seth Crane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Waldo precinct, State, of Maine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Sir John Franklin sought in vain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did primitive Christians ever train?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was the family-name of Cain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them spoons, were they by Betty ta’en?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would earth-worm poultice cure a sprain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Socrates so dreadful plain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What teamster guided Charles’s wain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Uncle Ethan mad or sane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And could his will in force remain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not, what counsel to retain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Le Sage steal Gil Blas from Spain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Junius writ by Thomas Paine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ducks discomforted by rain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>How</i> did Britannia rule the main?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Jonas coming back again?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was vital truth upon the wane?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did ghosts, to scare folks, drag a chain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was our Huldah’s chosen swain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did none have teeth pulled without payin’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere ether was invented?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether mankind would not agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the universe were tuned in C?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was it ailed Lucindy’s knee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether folks eat folks in Feejee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether <i>his</i> name would end with T?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Saturn’s rings were two or three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what bump in Phrenology</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They truly represented?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These problems dark, wherein they groped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith man’s reason vainly coped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now that the spirit-world was oped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all humility they hoped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be resolved <i>instanter</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each of the miscellaneous rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought his, or her, own little doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wished to pump the spirits out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his or her own private spout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his or her decanter.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Wherein it is shown that the most ardent spirits are more ornamental than useful</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Many a speculating wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came by express-trains, day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see if Knott would ‘sell his right,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meaning to make the ghosts a sight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What they call a ‘meenaygerie;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One threatened, if he would not ‘trade,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His run of custom to invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He could not these sharp folks persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was not, in some way, paid,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stamp him as a plagiary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By coming down, at one fell swoop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With <b>THE ORIGINAL KNOCKING TROUPE</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come recently from Hades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who (for a quarter-dollar heard)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would ne’er rap out a hasty word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence any blame might be incurred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the most fastidious ladies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The late lamented Jesse Soule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stir the ghosts up with a pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be director of the whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was engaged the rather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the rare merits he’d combine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having been in the spirit line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which trade he only did resign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With general applause, to shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awful in mail of cotton fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ghost of Hamlet’s father!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another a fair plan reveals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never yet hit on, which, he feels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Knott’s religious sense appeals⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘We’ll have your house set up on wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A speculation pious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For music, we can shortly find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A barrel-organ that will grind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Psalm-tunes⁠—an instrument designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the New England tour⁠—refined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From secular drosses, and inclined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To an unworldly turn, (combined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With no sectarian bias;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, travelling by stages slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the style of Knott &amp; Co.,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would accompany the show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As moral lecturer, the foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Rationalism; while you could throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rappings in, and make them go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strict Puritan principles, you know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(How <i>do</i> you make ’em? with your toe?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the receipts which thence might flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We could divide between us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still more attractions to combine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside these services of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will throw in a very fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(It would do nicely for a sign)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Original Titian’s Venus.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another offered handsome fees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Knott would get Demosthenes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Nay, his mere knuckles, for more ease)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rap a few short sentences;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if, for want of proper keys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Greek might make confusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then just to get a rap from Burke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To recommend a little work</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Public Elocution.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile, the spirits made replies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all the reverent <i>whats</i> and <i>whys</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolving doubts of every size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And giving seekers grave and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who came to know their destinies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rap-turous reception;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When unbelievers void of grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to investigate the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Creatures of Sadducistic race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With grovelling intellects and base,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not find the slightest trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To indicate deception;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed, it is declared by some</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spirits (of this sort) are glum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost, or wholly, deaf and dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (out of self-respect) quite mum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To skeptic natures cold and numb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who of <i>this</i> kind of Kingdom Come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not a just conception:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True, there were people who demurred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, though the raps no doubt were heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both under them and o’er them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, somehow, when a search they made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They found Miss Jenny sore afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Jenny’s lover, Doctor Slade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equally awestruck and dismayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Deborah, the chambermaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose terrors not to be gainsaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In laughs hysteric were displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was always there before them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This had its due effect with some</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who straight departed, muttering, Hum!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transparent hoax! and Gammon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these were few: believing souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came, day by day, in larger shoals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the ancients to the windy holes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath Delphi’s tripod brought their doles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to the shrine of Ammon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The spirits seemed exceeding tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call whom you fancied, and he came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shades august of eldest fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You summoned with an awful ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As grosser spirits gurgled out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From chair and table with a spout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Auerbach’s cellar once, to flout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The senses of the rabble rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er the gimlet twirled about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of cunning Mephistopheles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did these spirits seem in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the wainscot or the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to thrill the being’s core</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every enterprising bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their astounding glamour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever ghost one wished to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By strange coincidence, was near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the past or future clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Sometimes in shocking grammar)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By raps and taps, now there, now here⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed as if the spirit queer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some departed auctioneer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were doomed to practise by the year</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the spirit of his hammer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er you asked was answered, yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One could not very deeply get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the obliging spirits’ debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because they used the alphabet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all communications,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And new revealings (though sublime)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapped out, one letter at a time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With boggles, hesitations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stoppings, beginnings o’er again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And getting matters into train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could hardly overload the brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With too excessive rations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since just to ask <i>if two and two</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Really make four? or, How d’ ye do</i>?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And get the fit replies thereto</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the tramundane rat-tat-too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might ask a whole day’s patience.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas strange (‘mongst other things) to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what odd sets the ghosts combined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happy forthwith to thump any</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piece of intelligence inspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truth whereof had been inquired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By some one of the company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For instance, Fielding, Mirabeau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orator Henley, Cicero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paley, John Ziska, Marivaux,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melancthon, Robertson, Junot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scaliger, Chesterfield, Rousseau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hakluyt, Boccaccio, South, De Foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diaz, Josephus, Richard Roe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Odin, Arminius, Charles <i>le gros</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tiresias, the late James Crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casabianca, Grose, Prideaux,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Grimes, Young Norval, Swift, Brissot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Malmonides, the Chevalier D’O,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Socrates, Fénelon, Job, Stow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The inventor of <i>Elixir pro</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euripides, Spinoza, Poe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confucius, Hiram Smith, and Fo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came (as it seemed, somewhat <i>de trop</i>)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a disembodied Esquimaux,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say that it was so and so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Franklin’s expedition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One testified to ice and snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that the mercury was low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that his progress was quite slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that he much desired to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that the cook had frozen his toe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Dissented from by Dandolo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wordsworth, Cynaegirus, Boileau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>La Hontan, and Sir Thomas Roe,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One saw twelve white bears in a row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One saw eleven and a crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other things we could not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Of great statistic value, though,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By our mere mortal vision.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sometimes the spirits made mistakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seemed to play at ducks and drakes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bold inquiry’s heaviest stakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In science or in mystery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They knew so little (and that wrong)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet rapped it out so bold and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would have said the unnumbered throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had been Professors of History;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What made it odder was, that those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, you would naturally suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could solve a question, if they chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As easily as count their toes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were just the ones that blundered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One day, Ulysses happening down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A reader of Sir Thomas Browne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who (with him) had wondered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What song it was the Sirens sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asked the shrewd Ithacan⁠—<i>bang! bang!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this response the chamber rang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘I guess it was Old Hundred.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Franklin, being asked to name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reason why the lightning came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied, ‘Because it thundered.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On one sole point the ghosts agreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One fearful point, than which, indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing could seem absurder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Colonel Jones they all abused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finally downright accused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poor old man of murder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas thus; by dreadful raps was shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some spirit’s longing to make known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bloody fact, which he alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was privy to, (such ghosts more prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Earth’s affairs to meddle are;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Who are you?</i> with awe-stricken looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ask: his airy knuckles he crooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raps, ‘I <i>was</i> Eliab Snooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That used to be a pedler;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some on ye still are on my books!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat, to inconspicuous nooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(More fearing this than common spooks)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrank each indebted meddler;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Further the vengeful ghost declared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That while his earthly life was spared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the country he had fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A duly licensed follower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that much-wandering trade that wins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow profit from the sale of tins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And various kinds of hollow-ware;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Colonel Jones enticed him in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pretending that he wanted tin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There slew him with a rolling-pin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hid him in a potato-bin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And (the same night) him ferried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across Great Pond to t’other shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, on land of Widow Moore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just where you turn to Larkin’s store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a rock him buried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some friends (who happened to be by)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He called upon to testify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what he said was not a lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that he did not stir this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foul matter, out of any spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from a simple love of right;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which statements the Nine Worthies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rabbi Akiba, Charlemagne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seth, Golley Gibber, General Wayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cambyses, Tasso, Tubal-Cain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The owner of a castle in Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jehanghire, and the Widow of Nain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The friends aforesaid,) made more plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by loud raps attested;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the same purport testified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plato, John Wilkes, and Colonel Pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knew said Snooks before he died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in his wares invested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought him entitled to belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And freely could concur, in brief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In everything the rest did.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eliab this occasion seized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Distinctly here the spirit sneezed,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say that he should ne’er be eased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Jenny married whom she pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free from all checks and urgin’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This spirit dropt his final g’s)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that, unless Knott quickly sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This done, the spirits to appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would come back his life to tease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thick as mites in ancient cheese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let his house on an endless lease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the ghosts (terrific rappers these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And veritable Eumenides)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Eleven Thousand Virgins!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Knott was perplexed and shook his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did not wish his child to wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a suspected murderer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For, true or false, the rumor spread,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as for this roiled life he led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘It would not answer,’ so he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘To have it go no furderer.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, scarce knowing what it meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reluctantly he gave consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Jenny, since ’twas evident</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she <i>would</i> follow her own bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should make her own election;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that appeared the only way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These frightful noises to allay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which had already turned him gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plunged him in dejection.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Accordingly, this artless maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her father’s ordinance obeyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, all in whitest crape arrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Miss Pulsifer the dresses made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wishes here the fact displayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she still carries on the trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third door south from Bagg’s Arcade,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very faint ‘I do’ essayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave her hand to Hiram Slade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which time forth, the ghosts were laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ne’er gave trouble after;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the Selectmen, be it known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dug underneath the aforesaid stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the poor pedler’s corpse was thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found thereunder a jaw-bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though, when the crowner sat thereon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He nothing hatched, except alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Successive broods of laughter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a frail and dingy thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which a grinder or two did cling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In color like molasses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which surgeons, called from far and wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the horror to decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having put on their glasses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reported thus: ‘To judge by looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These bones, by some queer hooks or crooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May have belonged to Mr. Snooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as men deepest read in books</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are perfectly aware, bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If buried fifty years or so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lose their identity and grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From human bones to bare bones.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still, if to Jaalam you go down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll find two parties in the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One headed by Benaiah Brown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one by Perez Tinkham;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first believe the ghosts all through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vow that they shall never rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happy chance by which they knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That people in Jupiter are blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very fond of Irish stew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two curious facts which Prince Lee Boo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapped clearly to a chosen few⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the others think ’em</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trick got up by Doctor Slade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Deborah the chambermaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that sly cretur Jinny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the revelations wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which the Brownites made big eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might have been given by Jared Keyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A natural fool and ninny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, last week, didn’t Eliab Snooks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come back with never better looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sharp as new-bought mackerel hooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bright as a new pin, eh?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good Parson Wilbur, too, avers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though to be mixed in parish stirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is worse than handling chestnut-burrs)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no case to his mind occurs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where spirits ever did converse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save in a kind of guttural Erse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So say the best authorities;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that a charge by raps conveyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be most scrupulously weighed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And searched into, before it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made public, since it may give pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cannot soon be cured again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one word may infix a stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ten cannot gloss over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though speaking for his private part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is rejoiced with all his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Miss Knott missed not her lover.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="an-oriental-apologue" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Oriental Apologue</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Somewhere in India, upon a time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Read it not Injah, or you spoil the verse,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There dwelt two saints whose privilege sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was to sit and watch the world grow worse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their only care (in that delicious clime)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At proper intervals to pray and curse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pracrit the dialect each prudent brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Used for himself, Damnonian for the other.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">One half the time of each was spent in praying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For blessings on his own unworthy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other half in fearfully portraying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where certain folks would go when they were dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This system of exchanges⁠—there’s no saying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what more solid barter ’twould have led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that a river, vext with boils and swellings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At rainy times, kept peace between their dwellings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So they two played at wordy battledore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept a curse forever in the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flying this way or that from shore to shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor other labor did this holy pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clothed and supported from the lavish store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which crowds lanigerous brought with daily care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They toiled not, neither did they spin; their bias</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was tow’rd the harder task of being pious.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Each from his hut rushed six score times a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a great canon of the Church full-rammed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cartridge theologic, (so to say,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched himself off, and then, recoiling, slammed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hovel’s door behind him in away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to his foe said plainly⁠—<i>you’ll</i> be damned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so like Potts and Wainwright, shrill and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The two D⁠⸺ D’d each other all day long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">One was a dancing Dervise, a Mohammedan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other was a Hindoo, a gymnosophist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One kept his whatd’yecallit and his Ramadan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughing to scorn the sacred rites and laws of his</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transfluvial rival, who, in turn, called Ahmed an</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old top, and, as a clincher, shook across a fist</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With nails six inches long, yet lifted not</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His eyes from off his navel’s mystic knot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Who whirls not round six thousand times an hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will go,’ screamed Ahmed, ‘to the evil place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May he eat dirt, and may the dog and Giaour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defile the graves of him and all his race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Allah loves faithful souls and gives them power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spin till they are purple in the face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some folks get you know what, but he that pure is</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earns Paradise and ninety thousand houris.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Upon the silver mountain, South by East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits Brahma fed upon the sacred bean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loves those men whose nails are still increased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who all their lives keep ugly, foul, and lean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis of his grace that not a bird or beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorned with claws like mine was ever seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The suns and stars are Brahma’s thoughts divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even as these trees I seem to see are mine.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Thou seem’st to see, indeed!’ roared Ahmed back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Were I but once across this plaguy stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a stout sapling in my hand, one whack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On those lank ribs would rid thee of that dream!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy Brahma-blasphemy is ipecac</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my soul’s stomach; couldst thou grasp the scheme</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of true redemption, thou wouldst know that Deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whirls by a kind of blessed spontaneity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘And this it is which keeps our earth here going</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the stars.’⁠—‘Oh, vile! but there’s a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepared for such; to think of Brahma throwing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worlds like a juggler’s balls up into Space!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why, not so much as a smooth lotos blowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is e’er allowed that silence to efface</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which broods round Brahma, and our earth, ’tis known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rests on a tortoise, moveless as this stone.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So they kept up their banning amoebæan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When suddenly came floating down the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A youth whose face like an incarnate pæan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowed, ’twas so full of grandeur and of gleam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘If there <i>be</i> gods, then, doubtless, this must be one,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought both at once, and then began to scream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Surely, whate’er immortals know, thou knowest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Decide between us twain before thou goest!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The youth was drifting in a slim canoe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most like a huge white water-lily’s petal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither of our theologians knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof ’twas made; whether of heavenly metal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seldseen, or of a vast pearl split in two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hollowed, was a point they could not settle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas good debate-seed, though, and bore large fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In after years of many a tart dispute.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There were no wings upon the stranger’s shoulders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet he seemed so capable of rising</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, had he soared like thistle-down, beholders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had thought the circumstance noways surprising;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough that he remained, and, when the scolders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hailed him as umpire in their vocal prize-ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The painter of his boat he lightly threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Around a lotos-stem, and brought her to.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The strange youth had a look as if he might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have trod far planets where the atmosphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Of nobler temper) steeps the face with light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as our skins are tanned and freckled here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His air was that of a cosmopolite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the wide universe from sphere to sphere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perhaps he was (his face had such grave beauty)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An officer of Saturn’s guards off duty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Both saints began to unfold their tales at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both wished their tales, like simial ones, prehensile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they might seize his ear; <i>fool! knave!</i> and <i>dunce!</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew zigzag back and forth, like strokes of pencil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a child’s fingers; voluble as duns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They jabbered like the stones on that immense hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the Arabian Nights; until the stranger</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began to think his ear-drums in some danger.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In general those who nothing have to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contrive to spend the longest time in doing it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They turn and vary it in every way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hashing it, stewing it, mincing it, <i>ragouting</i> it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes they keep it purposely at bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let it slip to be again pursuing it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They drone it, groan it, whisper it and shout it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Refute it, flout it, swear to ‘t, prove it, doubt it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Our saints had practised for some thirty years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their talk, beginning with a single stem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spread like a banyan, sending down live piers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colonies of digression, and, in them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Germs of yet new dispersion; once by the ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could convey damnation in a hem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And blow the pinch of premise-priming off</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long syllogistic batteries, with a cough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Each had a theory that the human ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A providential tunnel was, which led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a huge vacuum (and surely here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They showed some knowledge of the general head,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For cant to be decanted through, a mere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Auricular canal or mill-race fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All day and night, in sunshine and in shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From their vast heads of milk-and-water-power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The present being a peculiar case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with unwonted zeal the other scouted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put his spurred hobby through its every pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pished, pshawed, poohed, horribled, bahed, jeered, sneered, flouted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sniffed, nonsensed, infideled, fudged, with his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked scorn too nicely shaded to be shouted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with each inch of person and of vesture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Contrived to hint some most disdainful gesture.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">At length, when their breath’s end was come about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both could now and then just gasp ‘impostor!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Holding their heads thrust menacingly out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As staggering cocks keep up their fighting posture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger smiled and said, ‘Beyond a doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis fortunate, my friends, that you have lost your</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">United parts of speech, or it had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impossible for me to get between.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Produce! says Nature⁠—what have you produced?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new strait-waistcoat for the human mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are you not limbed, nerved, jointed, arteried, juiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As other men? yet, faithless to your kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather like noxious insects you are used</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To puncture life’s fair fruit, beneath the rind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laying your creed-eggs, whence in time there spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consumers new to eat and buzz and sting.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Work! you have no conception how ’twill sweeten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your views of Life and Nature, God and Man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had you been forced to earn what you have eaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your heaven had shown a less dyspeptic plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At present your whole function is to eat ten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talk ten times as rapidly as you can;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were your shape true to cosmogonic laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You would be nothing but a pair of jaws.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Of all the useless beings in creation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth could spare most easily you bakers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of little clay gods, formed in shape and fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Precisely in the image of their makers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why it would almost move a saint to passion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see these blind and deaf, the hourly breakers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of God’s own image in their brother men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set themselves up to tell the how, where, when,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Of God’s existence; one’s digestion’s worse⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So makes a god of vengeance and of blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another⁠—but no matter, they reverse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creation’s plan, out of their own vile mud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pat up a god, and burn, drown, hang, or curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever worships not; each keeps his stud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of texts which wait with saddle on and bridle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hunt down atheists to their ugly idol.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘This, I perceive, has been your occupation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You should have been more usefully employed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All men are bound to earn their daily ration,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where States make not that primal contract void</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By cramps and limits; simple devastation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the worm’s task, and what he has destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His monument; creating is man’s work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, too, something more than mist and murk.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So having said, the youth was seen no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway our sage Brahmin, the philosopher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried, ‘That was aimed at thee, thou endless bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idle and useless as the growth of moss over</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rotting tree-trunk!’ ‘I would square that score</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full soon,’ replied the Dervise, ‘could I cross over</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And catch thee by the beard. Thy nails I’d trim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make thee work, as was advised by him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Work? Am I not at work from morn till night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounding the deeps of oracles umbilical</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which for man’s guidance never come to light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their various aptitudes, until I call?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘And I, do I not twirl from left to right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For conscience’ sake? Is that no work? Thou silly gull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had thee in his eye; ’twas Gabriel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent to reward my faith, I know him well.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">’Twas Vishnu, thou vile whirligig!’ and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good old quarrel was begun anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One would have sworn the sky was black as sloe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had but the other dared to call it blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor were the followers who fed them slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To treat each other with their curses, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each hating t’other (moves it tears or laughter?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he thought him sure of hell hereafter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">At last some genius built a bridge of boats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the stream, and Ahmed’s zealots filed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across, upon a mission to (cut throats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And) spread religion pure and undefiled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They sowed the propagandist’s wildest oats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cutting off all, down to the smallest child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And came back, giving thanks for such fat mercies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find their harvest gone past prayers or curses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">All gone except their saint’s religious hops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which he kept up with more than common flourish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But these, however satisfying crops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the inner man, were not enough to nourish</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The body politic, which quickly drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reserve in such sad junctures, and turns currish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Ahmed soon got cursed for all the famine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er the popular voice could edge a damn in.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">At first he pledged a miracle quite boldly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for a day or two, they growled and waited;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, finding that this kind of manna coldly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat on their stomachs, they erelong berated</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The saint for still persisting in that old lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till soon the whole machine of saintship grated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ran slow, creaked, stopped, and, wishing him in Tophet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They gathered strength enough to stone the prophet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Some stronger ones contrived (by eatting leather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their weaker friends, and one thing or another)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winter months of scarcity to weather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among these was the late saint’s younger brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in the spring, collecting them together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuaded them that Ahmed’s holy pother</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had wrought in their behalf, and that the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Saint should be continued to his race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Accordingly, ’twas settled on the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Allah favored that peculiar breed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside, as all were satisfied, ’twould not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be quite respectable to have the need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of public spiritual food forgot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so the tribe, with proper forms, decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, and, failing him, his next of kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forever for the people’s good should spin.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-charles-eliot-norton" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Charles Eliot Norton</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Agro Dolce</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The wind is roistering out of doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My windows shake and my chimney roars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Elmwood chimneys seem crooning to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of old, in their moody, minor key,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of the past the hoarse wind blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I sit in my arm-chair, and toast my toes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Ho! ho! nine-and-forty,’ they seem to sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘We saw you a little toddling thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We knew you child and youth and man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wonderful fellow to dream and plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a great thing always to come⁠—who knows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, well! ’tis some comfort to toast one’s toes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘How many times have you sat at gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the mouldering fire forgot to blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaping among the whimsical coals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fancies and figures and shining goals!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What matters the ashes that cover those?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While hickory lasts you can toast your toes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘O dream-ship-builder: where are they all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your grand three-deckers, deep-chested and tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should crush the waves under canvas piles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anchor at last by the Fortunate Isles?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s gray in your beard, the years turn foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While you muse in your arm-chair, and toast your toes.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I sit and dream that I hear, as of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Elmwood chimneys’ deep-throated roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If much be gone, there is much remains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the embers of loss I count my gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You and yours with the best, till the old hope glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fanciful flame, as I toast my toes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Instead of a fleet of broad-browed ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send a child’s armada of chips!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of the great gun, tier on tier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A freight of pebbles and grass-blades sere!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Well, maybe more love with the less gift goes,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I growl, as, half moody, I toast my toes.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="under-the-willows" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Under the Willows</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Frank-hearted hostess of the field and wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gypsy, whose roof is every spreading tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>June is the pearl of our New England year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still a surprisal, though expected long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her coming startles. Long she lies in wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes many a feint, peeps forth, draws coyly back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, from some southern ambush in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one great gush of blossom storms the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A week ago the sparrow was divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bluebird, shifting his light load of song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From post to post along the cheerless fence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was as a rhymer ere the poet come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, oh rapture! sunshine winged and voiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pipe blown through by the warm wild breath of the West</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shepherding his soft droves of fleecy cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladness of woods, skies, waters, all in one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bobolink has come, and, like the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sweet season vocal in a bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gurgles in ecstasy we know not what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save <i>June! Dear June! Now God be praised for June</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>May is a pious fraud of the almanac,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ghastly parody of real Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaped out of snow and breathed with eastern wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if, o’er-confident, she trust the date,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with her handful of anemones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself as shivery, steal into the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The season need but turn his hour-glass round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Winter suddenly, like crazy Lear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reels back, and brings the dead May in his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her budding breasts and wan dislustred front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With frosty streaks and drifts of his white beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All overblown. Then, warmly walled with books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While my wood-fire supplies the sun’s defect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispering old forest-sagas in its dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I take my May down from the happy shelf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where perch the world’s rare song-birds in a row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting my choice to open with full breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beg an alms of springtime, ne’er denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indoors by vernal Chaucer, whose fresh woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throb thick with merle and mavis all the year.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>July breathes hot, sallows the crispy fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curls up the wan leaves of the lilac-hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every eve cheats us with show of clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That braze the horizon’s western rim, or hang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Motionless, with heaped canvas drooping idly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a dim fleet by starving men besieged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjectured half, and half descried afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helpless of wind, and seeming to slip back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the smooth curve of the oily sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But June is full of invitations sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from the chimney’s yawn and thrice-read tomes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leisurely delights and sauntering thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brook no ceiling narrower than the blue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cherry, drest for bridal, at my pane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brushes, then listens, <i>Will he come?</i> The bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All dusty as a miller, takes his toll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of powdery gold, and grumbles. What a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sun me and do nothing! Nay, I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merely to bask and ripen is sometimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The student’s wiser business; the brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That forages all climes to line its cells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ranging both worlds on lightest wings of wish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not distil the juices it has sucked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sweet substance of pellucid thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except for him who hath the secret learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mix his blood with sunshine, and to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds into his pulses. Hush! ’tis he!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My oriole, my glance of summer fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is come at last, and, ever on the watch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twitches the packthread I had lightly wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the bough to help his housekeeping⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twitches and scouts by turns, blessing his luck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet fearing me who laid it in his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, more than wiser we in our affairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divines the providence that hides and helps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Heave, ho! Heave, ho!</i> he whistles as the twine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slackens its hold; <i>once more, now!</i> and a flash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightens across the sunlight to the elm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where his mate dangles at her cup of felt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor all his booty is the thread; he trails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My loosened thought with it along the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I must follow, would I ever find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inward rhyme to all this wealth of life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I care not how men trace their ancestry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ape or Adam: let them please their whim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I in June am midway to believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tree among my far progenitors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such sympathy is mine with all the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such mutual recognition vaguely sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is between us. Surely there are times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they consent to own me of their kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And condescend to me, and call me cousin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmuring faint lullabies of eldest time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgotten, and yet dumbly felt with thrills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving the lips, though fruitless of all words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have many a lifelong leafy friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never estranged nor careful of my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That knows I hate the axe, and welcomes me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his tent as if I were a bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or other free companion of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet undegenerate to the shifts of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them one, an ancient willow, spreads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight balanced limbs, springing at once all round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His deep-ridged trunk with upward slant diverse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In outline like enormous beaker, fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hand of Jotun, where mid snow and mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He holds unwieldy revel. This tree, spared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not by what grace⁠—for in the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our New World subduers lingers yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereditary feud with trees, they being</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(They and the red-man most) our fathers’ foes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is one of six, a willow Pleiades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seventh fallen, that lean along the brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the steep upland dips into the marsh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their roots, like molten metal cooled in flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stiffened in coils and runnels down the bank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friend of all the winds, wide-armed he towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glints his steely aglets in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whitens fitfully with sudden bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of leaves breeze-lifted, much as when a shoal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of devious minnows wheel from where a pike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lurks balanced ’neath the lily-pads, and whirl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rood of silver bellies to the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! no acorn from the British oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath which slim fairies tripping wrought those rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of greenest emerald, wherewith fireside life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did with the invisible spirit of Nature wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was ever planted here! No darnel fancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might choke one useful blade in Puritan fields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With horn and hoof the good old Devil came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The witch’s broomstick was not contraband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all that superstition had of fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or piety of native sweet, was doomed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if there be who nurse unholy faiths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearing their god as if he were a wolf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That snuffed round every home and was not seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There should be some to watch and keep alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All beautiful beliefs. And such was that⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By solitary shepherd first surmised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under Thessalian oaks, loved by some maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of royal stirp, that silent came and vanished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As near her nest the hermit thrush, nor dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confess a mortal name⁠—that faith which gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Hamadryed to each tree; and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will hold it true that in this willow dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The open-handed spirit, frank and blithe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ancient Hospitality, long since,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ceremonious thrift, bowed out of doors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In June ’tis good to lie beneath a tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the blithe season comforts every sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeps all the brain in rest, and heals the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brimming it o’er with sweetness unawares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fragrant and silent as that rosy snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith the pitying apple-tree fills up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tenderly lines some last-year robin’s nest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There muse I of old times, old hopes, old friends⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old friends! The writing of those words has borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fancy backward to the gracious past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The generous past, when all was possible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all was then untried; the years between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have taught some sweet, some bitter lessons, none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wiser than this⁠—to spend in all things else,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of old friends to be most miserly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each year to ancient friendships adds a ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to an oak, and precious more and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without deservingness or help of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They grow, and, silent, wider spread, each year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their unbought ring of shelter or of shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred to me the lichens on the bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Nature’s milliners would scrape away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most dear and sacred every withered limb!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis good to set them early, for our faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pines as we age, and, after wrinkles come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few plant, but water dead ones with vain tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This willow is as old to me as life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under it full often have I stretched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling the warm earth like a thing alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gathering virtue in at every pore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it possessed me wholly, and thought ceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or was transfused in something to which thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is coarse and dull of sense. Myself was lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone from me like an ache, and what remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Become a part of the universal joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul went forth, and, mingling with the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Danced in the leaves; or, floating in the cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw its white double in the stream below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else, sublimed to purer ecstasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dilated in the broad blue over all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was the wind that dappled the lush grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tide that crept with coolness to its roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thin-winged swallow skating on the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life that gladdened everything was mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was I then truly all that I beheld?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or is this stream of being but a glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the mind sees its visionary self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, when the kingfisher flits o’er his bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the river’s hollow heaven below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His picture flits⁠—another, yet the same?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But suddenly the sound of human voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or footfall, like the drop a chemist pours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth in opacous cloud precipitate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The consciousness that seemed but now dissolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into an essence rarer than its own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am narrowed to myself once more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For here not long is solitude secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Fantasy left vacant to her spell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, sometimes, in this paradise of shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rippled with western winds, the dusty Tramp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing the treeless causey burn beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halts to unroll his bundle of strange food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And munch an unearned meal. I cannot help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Liking this creature, lavish Summer’s bedesman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from the almshouse steals when nights grow warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself his large estate and only charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the guest of haystack or of hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobly superior to the household gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That forfeits us our privilege of nature.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bait him with my match-box and my pouch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor grudge the uncostly sympathy of smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His equal now, divinely unemployed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some smack of Robin Hood is in the man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some secret league with wild wood-wandering things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is our ragged Duke, our barefoot Earl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By right of birth exonerate from toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who levies rent from us his tenants all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And serves the state by merely being. Here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Scissors-grinder, pausing, doffs his hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lets the kind breeze, with its delicate fan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winnow the heat from out his dank gray hair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grimy Ulysses, a much-wandered man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose feet are known to all the populous ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many men and manners he hath seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not without fruit of solitary thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, as the habit is of lonely men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unused to try the temper of their mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fence with others⁠—positive and shy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet knows to put an edge upon his speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pithily Saxon in unwilling talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him I entrap with my long-suffering knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, while its poor blade hums away in sparks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharpen my wit upon his gritty mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In motion set obsequious to his wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in its quality not much unlike.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor wants my tree more punctual visitors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children, they who are the only rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creating for the moment, and possessing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whate’er they choose to feign⁠—for still with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind Fancy plays the fairy godmother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strewing their lives with cheap material</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wingèd horses and Aladdin’s lamps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure elfin-gold, by manhood’s touch profane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dead leaves disenchanted⁠—long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the branches of the tree fixed seats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making an o’erturned box their table. Oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shrilling girls sit here between school hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And play at <i>What’s my thought like?</i> while the boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom the age chivalric ever bides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricked on by knightly spur of female eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climb high to swing and shout on perilous boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, from the willow’s armory equipped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With musket dumb, green banner, edgeless sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make good the rampart of their tree-redoubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst eager British storming from below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep alive the tale of Bunker’s Hill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here, too, the men that mend our village ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vexing Macadam’s ghost with pounded slate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their nooning take; much noisy talk they spend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On horses and their ills; and, as John Bull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tells of Lord This or That, who was his friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So these make boast of intimacies long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With famous teams, and add large estimates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By competition swelled from mouth to mouth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of how much they could draw, till one, ill pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have his legend overbid, retorts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘You take and stretch truck-horses in a string</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From here to Long Wharf end, one thing I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not heavy neither, they could never draw⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ensign’s long bow!’ Then laughter loud and long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they in their leaf-shadowed microcosm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Image the larger world; for wheresoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten men are gathered, the observant eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will find mankind in little, as the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glide up and set, and all the heavens revolve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the small welkin of a drop of dew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I love to enter pleasure by a postern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the broad popular gate that gulps the mob;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find my theatres in roadside nooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where men are actors, and suspect it not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Nature all unconscious works her will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every passion moves with easy gait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhampered by the buskin or the train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hating the crowd, where we gregarious men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead lonely lives, I love society,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor seldom find the best with simple souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unswerved by culture from their native bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground we meet on being primal man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nearer the deep bases of our lives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But oh, half heavenly, earthly half, my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou from those late ecstasies descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy lips still wet with the miraculous wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That transubstantiates all thy baser stuff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To such divinity that soul and sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more commingled in their source, are lost⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou descend to quench a vulgar thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the mere dregs and rinsings of the world?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, if my nature find her pleasure so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am content, nor need to blush; I take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My little gift of being clean from God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not haggling for a better, holding it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good as was ever any in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My days as good and full of miracle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pluck my nutriment from any bush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finding out poison as the first men did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By tasting and then suffering, if I must.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes my bush burns, and sometimes it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leafless wilding shivering by the wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have known when winter barberries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricked the effeminate palate with surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of savor whose mere harshness seemed divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, benediction of the higher mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And human-kindness of the lower! for both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be grateful while I live, nor question</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wisdom that hath made us what we are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such large range as from the ale-house bench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can reach the stars and be with both at home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They tell us we have fallen on prosy days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condemned to glean the leavings of earth’s feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where gods and heroes took delight of old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though our lives, moving in one dull round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of repetition infinite, become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stale as a newspaper once read, and though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>History herself, seen in her workshop, seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have lost the art that dyed those glorious panes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich with memorial shapes of saint and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pave with splendor the Past’s dusky aisles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Panes that enchant the light of common day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With colors costly as the blood of kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till with ideal hues it edge our thought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet while the world is left, while nature lasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And man the best of nature, there shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere contentment for these human hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some freshness, some unused material</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wonder and for song. I lose myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In other ways where solemn guide-posts say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>This way to Knowledge, This way to Repose</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here, here only, I am ne’er betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every by-path leads me to my love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God’s passionless reformers, influences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That purify and heal and are not seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall man say whence your virtue is, or how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye make medicinal the wayside weed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know that sunshine, through whatever rift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shaped it matters not, upon my walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paints discs as perfect-rounded as its source,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like its antitype, the ray divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However finding entrance, perfect still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeats the image unimpaired of God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We, who by shipwreck only find the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of divine wisdom, can but kneel at first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can but exult to feel beneath our feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That long stretched vainly down the yielding deeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shock and sustenance of solid earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inland afar we see what temples gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through immemorial stems of sacred groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we conjecture shining shapes therein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet for a space we love to wander here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the shells and seaweed of the beach.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So mused I once within my willow-tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One brave June morning, when the bluff northwest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrusting aside a dank and snuffling day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made us bitter at our neighbors’ sins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brimmed the great cup of heaven with sparkling cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roared a lusty stave; the sliding Charles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue toward the west, and bluer and more blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living and lustrous as a woman’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look once and look no more, with southward curve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran crinkling sunniness, like Helen’s hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glimpsed in Elysium, insubstantial gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From blossom-clouded orchards, far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bobolink tinkled; the deep meadows flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With multitudinous pulse of light and shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the bases of the southern hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While here and there a drowsy island rick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slept and its shadow slept; the wooden bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thundered, and then was silent; on the roofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun-warped shingles rippled with the heat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summer on field and hill, in heart and brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All life washed clean in this high tide of June.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dara" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dara</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When Persia’s sceptre trembled in a hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilted with harem-heats, and all the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was hovered over by those vulture ills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That snuff decaying empire from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, with a nature balanced as a star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dara arose, a shepherd of the hills.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He who had governed fleecy subjects well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made his own village by the selfsame spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secure and quiet as a guarded fold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, gathering strength by slow and wise degrees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under his sway, to neighbor villages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Order returned, and faith and justice old.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when it fortuned that a king more wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endued the realm with brain and hands and eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sought on every side men brave and just;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And having heard our mountain shepherd’s praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he refilled the mould of elder days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Dara gave a satrapy in trust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Dara shepherded a province wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in his viceroy’s sceptre took more pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in his crook before; but envy finds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More food in cities than on mountains bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the frank sun of natures clear and rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breeds poisonous fogs in low and marish minds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon it was hissed into the royal ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, though wise Dara’s province, year by year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a great sponge, sucked wealth and plenty up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, when he squeezed it at the king’s behest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some yellow drops, more rich than all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to the filling of his private cup.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For proof, they said, that, wheresoe’er he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chest, beneath whose weight the camel bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with him; and no mortal eye had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was therein, save only Dara’s own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when ’twas opened, all his tent was known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glow and lighten with heaped jewels’ sheen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The King set forth for Dara’s province straight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as was fit, outside the city’s gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The viceroy met him with a stately train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, with archers circled, close at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A camel with the chest was seen to stand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King’s brow reddened, for the guilt was plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Open me here,’ he cried, ‘this treasure-chest!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas done; and only a worn shepherd’s vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was found therein. Some blushed and hung the head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Dara; open as the sky’s blue roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood, and ‘O my lord, behold the proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was faithful to my trust,’ he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘To govern men, lo all the spell I had!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul in these rude vestments ever clad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to the unstained past kept true and leal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still on these plains could breathe her mountain air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fortune’s heaviest gifts serenely bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bend men from their truth and make them reel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘For ruling wisely I should have small skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I not lord of simple Dara still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sceptre kept, I could not lose my way.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange dew in royal eyes grew round and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strained the throbbing lids; before ’twas night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two added provinces blest Dara’s sway.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-singing-leaves" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Singing Leaves</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Ballad</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘What fairings will ye that I bring?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said the King to his daughters three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘For I to Vanity Fair am bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now say what shall they be?’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up and spake the eldest daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lady tall and grand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Oh, bring me pearls and diamonds great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gold rings for my hand.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereafter spake the second daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was both white and red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘For me bring silks that will stand alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a gold comb for my head.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the turn of the least daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was whiter than thistle-down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And among the gold of her blithesome hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dim shone the golden crown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘There came a bird this morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sang ’neath my bower eaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I dreamed, as his music made me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ask thou for the Singing Leaves.” ’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then the brow of the King swelled crimson</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a flush of angry scorn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Well have ye spoken, my two eldest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chosen as ye were born;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘But she, like a thing of peasant race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is happy binding the sheaves;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he saw her dead mother in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, ‘Thou shalt have thy leaves.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He mounted and rode three days and nights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he came to Vanity Fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’twas easy to buy the gems and the silk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no Singing Leaves were there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then deep in the greenwood rode he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And asked of every tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Oh, if you have ever a Singing Leaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pray you give it me!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the trees all kept their counsel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never a word said they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only there sighed from the pine-tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A music of seas far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Only the pattering aspen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made a sound of growing rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fell ever faster and faster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then faltered to silence again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘Oh, where shall I find a little foot-page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would win both hose and shoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will bring to me the Singing Leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If they grow under the moon?’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then lightly turned him Walter the page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the stirrup as he ran:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Now pledge you me the truesome word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a king and gentleman,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘That you will give me the first, first thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You meet at your castle-gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Princess shall get the Singing Leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or mine be a traitor’s fate.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The King’s head dropt upon his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moment, as it might be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twill be my dog, he thought, and said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘My faith I plight to thee.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Walter took from next his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A packet small and thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Now give you this to the Princess Anne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Singing Leaves are therein.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As the King rode in at his castle-gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A maiden to meet him ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ‘Welcome, father!’ she laughed and cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together, the Princess Anne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘Lo, here the Singing Leaves,’ quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘And woe, but they cost me dear!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took the packet, and the smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepened down beneath the tear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It deepened down till it reached her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then gushed up again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lighted her tears as the sudden sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transfigures the summer rain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And the first Leaf, when it was opened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sang: ‘I am Walter the page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the songs I sing ’neath thy window</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are my only heritage.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And the second Leaf sang: ‘But in the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is neither on earth nor sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lute and I are lords of more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than thrice this kingdom’s fee.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And the third Leaf sang, ‘Be mine! Be mine!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever it sang, ‘Be mine!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sweeter it sang and ever sweeter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, ‘I am thine, thine, thine!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At the first Leaf she grew pale enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the second she turned aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the third, ’twas as if a lily flushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a rose’s red heart’s tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘Good counsel gave the bird,’ said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘I have my hope thrice o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they sing to my very heart,’ she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘And it sings to them evermore.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She brought to him her beauty and truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But and broad earldoms three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he made her queen of the broader lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He held of his lute in fee.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="seaweed" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Seaweed</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Not always unimpeded can I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, pitying saint, thine intercession claim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too closely clings the burden of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the mint and anise that I pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But swells my debt and deepens my self-blame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall I less patience have than Thou, who know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Thou revisit’st all who wait for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor only fill’st the unsounded deeps below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dost refresh with punctual overflow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rifts where unregarded mosses be?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The drooping seaweed hears, in night abyssed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far and more far the wave’s receding shocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor doubts, for all the darkness and the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the pale shepherdess will keep her tryst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoreward lead again her foam-fleeced flocks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the same wave that rims the Carib shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With momentary brede of pearl and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes hurrying thence to gladden with its roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lorn weeds bound fast on rocks of Labrador,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By love divine on one sweet errand rolled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, though Thy healing waters far withdraw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, too, can wait and feed on hope of Thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the dear recurrence of Thy law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure that the parting grace my morning saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abides its time to come in search of me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-finding-of-the-lyre" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Finding of the Lyre</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There lay upon the ocean’s shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What once a tortoise served to cover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A year and more, with rush and roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surf had rolled it over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had played with it, and flung it by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wind and weather might decide it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then tossed it high where sand-drifts dry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheap burial might provide it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It rested there to bleach or tan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rains had soaked, the suns had burned it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a ban the fisherman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had stumbled o’er and spurned it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the fisher-girl would stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjecturing with her brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How in their play the poor estray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might serve some use or other.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So there it lay, through wet and dry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As empty as the last new sonnet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till by and by came Mercury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having mused upon it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Why, here,’ cried he, ‘the thing of things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shape, material, and dimension!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give it but strings, and, lo, it sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wonderful invention!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So said, so done; the chords he strained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as his fingers o’er them hovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shell disdained a soul had gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lyre had been discovered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O empty world that round us lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead shell, of soul and thought forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought we but eyes like Mercury’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thee what songs should waken!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="new-years-eve-1850" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">New-Year’s Eve, 1850</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This is the midnight of the century⁠—hark!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through aisle and arch of Godminster have gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve throbs that tolled the zenith of the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mornward now the starry hands move on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Mornward!’ the angelic watchers say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Passed is the sorest trial;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No plot of man can stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand upon the dial;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night is the dark stem of the lily Day.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If we, who watched in valleys here below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward streaks, misdeemed of morn, our faces turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When volcan glares set all the east aglow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are not poorer that we wept and yearned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though earth swing wide from God’s intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though no man nor nation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will move with full consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heavenly gravitation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet by one Sun is every orbit bent.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-an-autograph" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">For an Autograph</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Though old the thought and oft exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis his at last who says it best⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll try my fortune with the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Life is a leaf of paper white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon each one of us may write</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His word or two, and then comes night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Lo, time and space enough,’ we cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘To write an epic!’ so we try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our nibs upon the edge, and die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Muse not which way the pen to hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luck hates the slow and loves the bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon come the darkness and the cold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Greatly begin! though thou have time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for a line, be that sublime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not failure, but low aim, is crime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, with what lofty hope we came!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we forget it, dream of fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scrawl, as I do here, a name.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="masaccio" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Masaccio</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">In the Brancacci Chapel</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>He came to Florence long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And painted here these walls, that shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Raphael and for Angelo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With secrets deeper than his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shrank into the dark again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died, we know not how or when.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The shadows deepened, and I turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half sadly from the fresco grand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘And is this,’ mused I, ‘all ye earned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-vaulted brain and cunning hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye to greater men could teach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skill yourselves could never reach?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘And who were they,’ I mused, ‘that wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through pathless wilds, with labor long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highways of our daily thought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who reared those towers of earliest song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lift us from the crowd to peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remote in sunny silences?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Out clanged the Ave Mary bells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to my heart this message came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each clamorous throat among them tells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What strong-souled martyrs died in flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make it possible that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst here with brother sinners bow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thoughts that great hearts once broke for, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe cheaply in the common air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust we trample heedlessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throbbed once in saints and heroes rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who perished, opening for their race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New pathways to the commonplace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Henceforth, when rings the health to those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who live in story and in song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O nameless dead, that now repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe in Oblivion’s chambers strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One cup of recognition true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall silently be drained to you!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="without-and-within" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Without and Within</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My coachman, in the moonlight there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looks through the side-light of the door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear him with his brethren swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I could do⁠—but only more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Flattening his nose against the pane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He envies me my brilliant lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathes on his aching fists in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dooms me to a place more hot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sees me in to supper go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A silken wonder by my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare arms, bare shoulders, and a row</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of flounces, for the door too wide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He thinks how happy is my arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Neath its white-gloved and jewelled load;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wishes me some dreadful harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing the merry corks explode.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile I inly curse the bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hunting still the same old coon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And envy him, outside the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In golden quiets of the moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The winter wind is not so cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the bright smile he sees me win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the host’s oldest wine so old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As our poor gabble sour and thin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I envy him the ungyved prance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which his freezing feet he warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drag my lady’s chains and dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The galley-slave of dreary forms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, could he have my share of din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I his quiet!⁠—past a doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould still be one man bored within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And just another bored without.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, when, once paid my mortal fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some idler on my headstone grim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traces the moss-blurred name, will he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Think me the happier, or I him?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="godminster-chimes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Godminster Chimes</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Written in Aid of a Chime of Bells for Christ Church, Cambridge</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Godminster? Is it Fancy’s play?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, but the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings in my heart, nor can I say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether ’twas dreamed or heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet fragrant in my mind it clings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As blossoms after rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And builds of half-remembered things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This vision in my brain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through aisles of long-drawn centuries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My spirit walks in thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to that symbol lifts its eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which God’s own pity wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Calvary shines the altar’s gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Church’s East is there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ages one great minster seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That throbs with praise and prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all the way from Calvary down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The carven pavement shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their graves who won the martyr’s crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And safe in God repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The saints of many a warring creed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who now in heaven have learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all paths to the Father lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Self the feet have spurned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as the mystic aisles I pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By aureoled workmen built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lives ending at the Cross I trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike through grace and guilt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Mary bathes the blessed feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ointment from her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spikenard one, and both are sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For both are sacrifice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Moravian hymn and Roman chant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In one devotion blend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak the soul’s eternal want</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Him, the inmost friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One prayer soars cleansed with martyr fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One choked with sinner’s tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaven both meet in one desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And God one music hears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whilst thus I dream, the bells clash out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the Sabbath air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each seems a hostile faith to shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A selfish form of prayer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My dream is shattered, yet who knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in that heaven so near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These discords find harmonious close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In God’s atoning ear?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O chime of sweet Saint Charity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peal soon that Easter morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Christ for all shall risen be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in all hearts new-born!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Pentecost when utterance clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all men shall be given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all shall say <i>My Brother</i> here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hear <i>My Son</i> in heaven!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-parting-of-the-ways" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Parting of the Ways</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Who hath not been a poet? Who hath not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With life’s new quiver full of wingèd years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot at a venture, and then, following on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood doubtful at the Parting of the Ways?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There once I stood in dream, and as I paused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking this way and that, came forth to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The figure of a woman veiled, that said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘My name is Duty, turn and follow me;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something there was that chilled me in her voice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I felt Youth’s hand grow slack and cold in mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to be withdrawn, and I exclaimed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Oh, leave the hot wild heart within my breast!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duty comes soon enough, too soon comes Death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This slippery globe of life whirls of itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasting our youth away into the dark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These senses, quivering with electric heats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too soon will show, like nests on wintry boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obtrusive emptiness, too palpable wreck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which whistling north-winds line with downy snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes, or fringe with foliaged rime, in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither the singing birds no more return.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then glowed to me a maiden from the left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bosom half disclosed, and naked arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More white and undulant than necks of swans;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all before her steps an influence ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm as the whispering South that opens buds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swells the laggard sails of Northern May.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I am called Pleasure, come with me!’ she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then laughed, and shook out sunshine from her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor only that, but, so it seemed, shook out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All memory too, and all the moonlit past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old loves, old aspirations, and old dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More beautiful for being old and gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So we two went together; downward sloped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The path through yellow meads, or so I dreamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yellow with sunshine and young green, but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw naught nor heard, shut up in one close joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I only felt the hand within my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transmuting all my blood to golden fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissolving all my brain in throbbing mist.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Suddenly shrank the hand; suddenly burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry that split the torpor of my brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the first sharp thrust of lightning loosens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heaped cloud its rain, loosened my sense:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Save me!’ it thrilled; ‘oh, hide me! there is Death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death the divider, the unmerciful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That digs his pitfalls under Love and Youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covers Beauty up in the cold ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horrible Death! bringer of endless dark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him not see me! hide me in thy breast!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereat I strove to clasp her, but my arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met only what slipped crumbling down, and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A handful of gray ashes, at my feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I would have fled, I would have followed back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pleasant path we came, but all was changed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocky the way, abrupt, and hard to find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I toiled on, and, toiling on, I thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘That way lies Youth, and Wisdom, and all Good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For only by unlearning Wisdom comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climbing backward to diviner Youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the world teaches profits to the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the soul teaches profits to the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which then first stands erect with Godward face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she lets fall her pack of withered facts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleanings of the outward eye and ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looks and listens with her finer sense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Truth nor Knowledge cometh from without.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After long, weary days I stood again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waited at the Parting of the Ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the figure of a woman veiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood forth and beckoned, and I followed now:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to no bower of roses led the path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But through the streets of towns where chattering Cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hewed wood for fires whose glow was owned and fenced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Nakedness wove garments of warm wool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for itself;⁠—or through the fields it led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Hunger reaped the unattainable grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where idleness enforced saw idle lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leagues of unpeopled soil, the common earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walled round with paper against God and Man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I cannot look,’ I groaned, ‘at only these;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart grows hardened with perpetual wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And palters with a feigned necessity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bargaining with itself to be content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Let me behold thy face.’</span>
					<span>The Form replied:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Men follow Duty, never overtake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duty nor lifts her veil nor looks behind.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as she spake, a loosened lock of hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slipped from beneath her hood, and I, who looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see it gray and thin, saw amplest gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that dull metal dug from sordid earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But such as the retiring sunset flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves heaped on bays and capes of island cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O Guide divine,’ I prayed, ‘although not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may repair the virtue which I feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone out at touch of untuned things and foul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With draughts of Beauty, yet declare how soon!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Faithless and faint of heart,’ the voice returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou seest no beauty save thou make it first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man, Woman, Nature each is but a glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the soul sees the image of herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visible echoes, offsprings of herself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, since thou need’st assurance of how soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait till that angel comes who opens all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reconciler, he who lifts the veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reuniter, the rest-bringer, Death.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I waited, and methought he came; but how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in what shape, I doubted, for no sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By touch or mark, he gave me as he passed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only I knew a lily that I held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapt short below the head and shrivelled up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turned my Guide and looked at me unveiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I beheld no face of matron stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that enchantment I had followed erst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only more fair, more clear to eye and brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heightened and chastened by a household charm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She smiled, and ‘Which is fairer,’ said her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The hag’s unreal Florimel or mine?’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="aladdin" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Aladdin</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When I was a beggarly boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lived in a cellar damp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had not a friend nor a toy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I had Aladdin’s lamp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I could not sleep for the cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I had fire enough in my brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And builded, with roofs of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My beautiful castles in Spain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since then I have toiled day and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have money and power good store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’d give all my lamps of silver bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the one that is mine no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take, Fortune, whatever you choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You gave, and may snatch again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have nothing ’twould pain me to lose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I own no more castles in Spain!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-invitation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">An Invitation</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To J[ohn] F[rancis] H[eath]</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Nine years have slipt like hour-glass sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From life’s still-emptying globe away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since last, dear friend, I clasped your hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood upon the impoverished land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the steamer down the bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I held the token which you gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While slowly the smoke-pennon curled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the vague rim ’tween sky and wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shut the distance like a grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving me in the colder world;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The old, worn world of hurry and heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young, fresh world of thought and scope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While you, where beckoning billows fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climb far sky-beaches still and sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank wavering down the ocean-slope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You sought the new world in the old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I found the old world in the new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that our human hearts can hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inward world of deathless mould,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same that Father Adam knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He needs no ship to cross the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, in the lives about him, sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair window-prospects opening wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er history’s fields on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ind and Egypt, Rome and Greece.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whatever moulds of various brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’er shaped the world to weal or woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever empires’ wax and wane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him that hath not eyes in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our village-microcosm can show.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Come back our ancient walks to tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear haunts of lost or scattered friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Harvard’s scholar-factories red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where song and smoke and laughter sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nights to proctor-haunted ends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Constant are all our former loves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unchanged the icehouse-girdled pond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its hemlock glooms, its shadowy coves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where floats the coot and never moves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its slopes of long-tamed green beyond.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our old familiars are not laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though snapt our wands and sunk our books;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They beckon, not to be gainsaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, round broad meads that mowers wade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Charles his steel-blue sickle crooks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where, as the cloudbergs eastward blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From glow to gloom the hillsides shift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their plumps of orchard-trees arow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lakes of rye that wave and flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their snowy whiteweed’s summer drift.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There have we watched the West unfurl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud Byzantium newly born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flickering spires and domes of pearl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vapory surfs that crowd and curl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the sunset’s Golden Horn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There, as the flaming occident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burned slowly down to ashes gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night pitched o’erhead her silent tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glimmering gold from Hesper sprent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the darkened river lay,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where a twin sky but just before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deepened, and double swallows skimmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from a visionary shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung visioned trees, that more and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew dusk as those above were dimmed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then eastward saw we slowly grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear-edged the lines of roof and spire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While great elm-masses blacken slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And linden-ricks their round heads show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a flush of widening fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Doubtful at first and far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon-flood creeps more wide and wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up a ridged beach of cloudy gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curved round the east as round a bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It slips and spreads its gradual tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then suddenly, in lurid mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The disk looms large o’er town and field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As upon Adam, red like blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tween him and Eden’s happy wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glared the commissioned angel’s shield.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or let us seek the seaside, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wander idly as we list,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether, on rocky headlands bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp cedar-horns, like breakers, tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trailing fringes of gray mist,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or whether, under skies full flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brightening surfs, with foamy din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their breeze-caught forelocks backward blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the beach’s yellow zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curl slow, and plunge forever in.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as we watch those canvas towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lean along the horizon’s rim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sail on,’ I’ll say; ‘may sunniest hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convoy you from this land of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since from my side you bear not him!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For years thrice three, wise Horace said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poem rare let silence bind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love may ripen to the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ours, for nine long seasons laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deepest arches of the mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Come back! Not ours the Old World’s good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old World’s ill, thank God, not ours;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here, far better understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The days enforce our native mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And challenge all our manlier powers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Kindlier to me the place of birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first my tottering footsteps trod;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may be fairer spots of earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all their glories are not worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The virtue in the native sod.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thence climbs an influence more benign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through pulse and nerve, through heart and brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred to me those fibres fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first clasped earth. Oh, ne’er be mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The alien sun and alien rain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These nourish not like homelier glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or waterings of familiar skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nature fairer blooms bestows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the heaped hush of wintry snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pastures dear to childhood’s eyes,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Than where Italian earth receives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The partial sunshine’s ampler boons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where vines carve friezes ’neath the eaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in dark firmaments of leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orange lifts its golden moons.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-nomades" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Nomades</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What Nature makes in any mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me is warranted for good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though long before I learned to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She did not set us moral theses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scorned to have her sweet caprices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strait-waistcoated in you or me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I, who take root and firmly cling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought fixedness the only thing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why Nature made the butterflies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Those dreams of wings that float and hover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At noon the slumberous poppies over,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was something hidden from mine eyes,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till once, upon a rock’s brown bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright as a thorny cactus-blossom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw a butterfly at rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then first of both I felt the beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The airy whim, the grim-set duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each from the other took its best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Clearer it grew than winter sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Nature still had reasons why;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, shifting sudden as a breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fancy found no satisfaction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No antithetic sweet attraction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So great as in the Nomades.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scythians, with Nature not at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light Arabs of our complex life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They build no houses, plant no mills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To utilize Time’s sliding river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content that it flow waste forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they, like it, may have their wills.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An hour they pitch their shifting tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thoughts, in feelings, and events;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the palm-trees, on the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sing, they dance, make love, and chatter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vex the grim temples with their clatter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make Truth’s fount their looking-glass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A picnic life; from love to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From faith to faith they lightly move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, hard-eyed philosopher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flightiest maid that ever hovered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me your thought-webs fine discovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No lens to see them through like her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So witchingly her finger-tips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Wisdom, as away she trips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She kisses, waves such sweet farewells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Duty, as she laughs ‘To-morrow!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That both from that mad contrast borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A perfectness found nowhere else.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The beach-bird on its pearly verge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follows and flies the whispering surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, in his tent, the rock-stayed shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaits the flood’s star-timed vibrations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both, the flutter and the patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sauntering poet loves them well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fulfil so much of God’s decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As works its problem out in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dream that in thy breast alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conscience of the changeful seasons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Will that in the planets reasons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With space-wide logic, has its throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy virtue makes not vice of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlike, but none the less divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy toil adorns, not chides, my play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature of sameness is so chary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such wild whim the freakish fairy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picks presents for the christening-day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="self-study" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Self-Study</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A presence both by night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That made my life seem just begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet scarce a presence, rather say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warning aureole of one.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet I felt it everywhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Walked I the woodland’s aisles along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed to brush me with its hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bathed I, I heard a mermaid’s song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How sweet it was! A buttercup</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could hold for me a day’s delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bird could lift my fancy up</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ether free from cloud or blight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who was the nymph? Nay, I will see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Methought, and I will know her near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If such, divined, her charm can be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seen and possessed, how triply dear!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So every magic art I tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spells as numberless as sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until, one evening, by my side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw her glowing fulness stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I turned to clasp her, but ‘Farewell,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parting she sighed, ‘we meet no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by my hand the curtain fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That leaves you conscious, wise, and poor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Since you nave found me out, I go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another lover I must find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content his happiness to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor strive its secret to unwind.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="pictures-from-appledore" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Pictures from Appledore</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A heap of bare and splintery crags</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tumbled about by lightning and frost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rifts and chasms and storm-bleached jags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wait and growl for a ship to be lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No island, but rather the skeleton</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a wrecked and vengeance-smitten one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, æons ago, with half-shut eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sluggish saurian crawled to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gasping under titanic ferns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ribs of rock that seaward jut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Granite shoulders and boulders and snags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round which, though the winds in heaven be shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nightmared ocean murmurs and yearns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welters, and swashes, and tosses, and turns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dreary black seaweed lolls and wags;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only rock from shore to shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only a moan through the bleak clefts blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sobs in the rifts where the coarse kelp shifts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falling and lifting, tossing and drifting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And under all a deep, dull roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying and swelling, forevermore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rock and moan and roar alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dread of some nameless thing unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These make Appledore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These make Appledore by night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there are monsters left and right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every rock is a different monster;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All you have read of, fancied, dreamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you waked at night because you screamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There they lie for half a mile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jumbled together in a pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (though you know they never once stir)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you look long, they seem to be moving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as plainly as plain can be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crushing and crowding, wading and shoving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out into the awful sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where you can hear them snort and spout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pauses between, as if they were listening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then tumult anon when the surf breaks glistening</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the blackness where they wallow about.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All this you would scarcely comprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should you see the isle on a sunny day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it is simple enough in its way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two rocky bulges, one at each end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a smaller bulge and a hollow between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patches of whortleberry and bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accidents of open green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprinkled with loose slabs square and gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like graveyards for ages deserted; a few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsocial thistles; an elder or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foamed over with blossoms white as spray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the whole island never a tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save a score of sumachs, high as your knee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crouch in hollows where they may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The cellars where once stood a village, men say,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huddling for warmth, and never grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall enough for a peep at the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A general dazzle of open blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breeze always blowing and playing rat-tat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the bow of the ribbon round your hat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A score of sheep that do nothing but stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up or down at you everywhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three or four cattle that chew the cud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lying about in a listless despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A medrick that makes you look overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With short, sharp scream, as he sights his prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, dropping straight and swift as lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Splits the water with sudden thud;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is Appledore by day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A common island, you will say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stay a moment: only climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the highest rock of the isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand there alone for a little while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with gentle approaches it grows sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dilating slowly as you win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sense from the silence to take it in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wide the loneness, so lucid the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The granite beneath you so savagely bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You well might think you were looking down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some sky-silenced mountain’s crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose waist-belt of pines is wont to tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Locks of wool from the topmost cloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only be sure you go alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Grandeur is inaccessibly proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never yet has backward thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her veil to feed the stare of a crowd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To more than one was never shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That awful front, nor is it fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she, Cothurnus-shod, stand bowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the self-approving pit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoy the gust of its own wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In babbling plaudits cheaply loud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hides her mountains and her sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the harriers of scenery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hunt down sunsets, and huddle and bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mouthing and mumbling the dying day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Trust me, ’tis something to be cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Face to face with one’s Self at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be taken out of the fuss and strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The endless clatter of plate and knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bore of books and the bores of the street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the singular mess we agree to call Life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where that is best which the most fools vote is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And planted firm on one’s own two feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So nigh to the great warm heart of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You almost seem to feel it beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from the sunshine and up from the sod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be compelled, as it were, to notice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the beautiful changes and chances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the landscape flits and glances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to see how the face of common day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is written all over with tender histories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you study it that intenser way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which a lover looks at his mistress.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till now you dreamed not what could be done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a bit of rock and a ray of sun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look, how fade the lights and shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of keen bare edge and crevice deep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How doubtfully it fades and fades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glows again, yon craggy steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which, through color’s dreamiest grades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The musing sunbeams pause and creep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now pink it blooms, now glimmers gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now shadows to a filmy blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tries one, tries all, and will not stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But flits from opal hue to hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And runs through every tenderest range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of change that seems not to be change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rare the sweep, so nice the art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lays no stress on any part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shifts and lingers and persuades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So soft that sun-brush in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That asks no costlier pigments’ aids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mingling knobs, flaws, angles, dints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indifferent of worst or best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchants the cliffs with wraiths and hints</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gracious preludings of tints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all seems fixed, yet all evades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And indefinably pervades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perpetual movement with perpetual rest!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Away northeast is Boone Island light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You might mistake it for a ship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only it stands too plumb upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like the others does not slip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the sea’s unsteady brink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though, if a cloud-shade chance to dip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon it a moment, ’twill suddenly sink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Levelled and lost in the darkened main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the sun builds it suddenly up again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if with a rub of Aladdin’s lamp.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the mainland you see a misty camp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mountains pitched tumultuously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one looming so long and large</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Saddleback, and that point you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over yon low and rounded marge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the boss of a sleeping giant’s targe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid over his breast, is Ossipee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shadow there may be Kearsarge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That must be Great Haystack; I love these names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith the lonely farmer tames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature to mute companionship</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his own mind’s domestic mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strives the surly world to clip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the arms of familiar habitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis well he could not contrive to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Saxon of Agamenticus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He glowers there to the north of us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapt in his blanket of blue haze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unconvertibly savage, and scorns to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white man’s baptism or his ways.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him first on shore the coaster divines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the early gray, and sees him shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning mist from his scalp-lock of pines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him first the skipper makes out in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the earliest sunstreak shoots tremulous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plashing with orange the palpitant lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mutable billow, crest after crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmurs <i>Agamenticus!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if it were the name of a saint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But is that a mountain playing cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a cloud playing mountain, just there, so faint?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look along over the low right shoulder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Agamenticus into that crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brassy thunderheads behind it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now you have caught it, but, ere you are older</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By half an hour, you will lose it and find it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A score of times; while you look ’tis gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, just as you’ve given it up, anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is there again, till your weary eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fancy they see it waver and rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its brother clouds; it is Agiochook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There if you seek not, and gone if you look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ninety miles off as the eagle flies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But mountains make not all the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mainland shows to Appledore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eight miles the heaving water spreads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a long, low coast with beaches and heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That run through unimagined mazes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the lights and shades and magical hazes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put them away or bring them near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shimmering, sketched out for thirty miles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between two capes that waver like threads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sink in the ocean, and reappear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crumbled and melted to little isles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With filmy trees, that seem the mere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-fancies of drowsy atmosphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see the beach there, where it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flat as a threshing-floor, beaten and packed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the flashing flails of weariless seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How it lifts and looms to a precipice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er whose square front, a dream, no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steepened sand-stripes seem to pour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A murmurless vision of cataract;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You almost fancy you hear a roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fitful and faint from the distance wandering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis only the blind old ocean maundering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raking the shingle to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aimlessly clutching and letting go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kelp-haired sedges of Appledore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slipping down with a sleepy forgetting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And anon his ponderous shoulder setting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a deep, hoarse pant against Appledore.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Eastward as far as the eye can see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still eastward, eastward, endlessly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sparkle and tremor of purple sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rises before you, a flickering hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On and on to the shut of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beyond, you fancy it sloping until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same multitudinous throb and thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That vibrate under your dizzy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ripples of orange and pink are sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the poppied sails doze on the yard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the clumsy junk and proa lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk deep with precious woods and nard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Mid the palmy isles of the Orient.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those leaning towers of clouded white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the farthest brink of doubtful ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shorten and shorten out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet seem on the selfsame spot to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receding with a motionless motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fading to dubious films of gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost, dimly found, then vanished wholly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will rise again, the great world under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First films, then towers, then high-heaped clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose nearing outlines sharpen slowly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into tall ships with cobweb shrouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fill long Mongol eyes with wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crushing the violet wave to spray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past some low headland of Cathay;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was that sigh which seemed so near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chilling your fancy to the core?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis only the sad old sea you hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seems to seek forevermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something it cannot find, and so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighing, seeks on, and tells its woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the pitiless breakers of Appledore.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How looks Appledore in a storm?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have seen it when its crags seemed frantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Butting against the mad Atlantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When surge on surge would heap enorme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cliffs of emerald topped with snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lifted and lifted, and then let go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great white avalanche of thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A grinding, blinding, deafening ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monadnock might have trembled under;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the island, whose rock-roots pierce below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where they are warmed with the central fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You could feel its granite fibres racked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it seemed to plunge with a shudder and thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right at the breast of the swooping hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to rise again snorting a cataract</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rage-froth from every cranny and ledge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the sea drew its breath in hoarse and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the next vast breaker curled its edge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering itself for a mightier leap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>North, east, and south there are reefs and breakers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You would never dream of in smooth weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That toss and gore the sea for acres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bellowing and gnashing and snarling together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look northward, where Duck Island lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over its crown you will see arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against a background of slaty skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A row of pillars still and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glimmer, and then are gone from sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the moon should suddenly kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While you crossed the gusty desert by night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long colonnades of Persepolis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look southward for White Island light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lantern stands ninety feet o’er the tide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is first a half-mile of tumult and fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dash and roar and tumble and fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And surging bewilderment wild and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the breakers struggle left and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then a mile or more of rushing sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the lighthouse slim and lone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whenever the weight of ocean is thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full and fair on White Island head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A great mist-jotun you will see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifting himself up silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High and huge o’er the lighthouse top,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hands of wavering spray outspread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Groping after the little tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seems to shrink and shorten and cower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the monster’s arms of a sudden drop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silently and fruitlessly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sinks back into the sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You, meanwhile, where drenched you stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awaken once more to the rush and roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the rock-point tighten your hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As you turn and see a valley deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was not there a moment before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suck rattling down between you and a heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of toppling billow, whose instant fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must sink the whole island once for all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or watch the silenter, stealthier seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feeling their way to you more and more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they once should clutch you high as the knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would whirl you down like a sprig of kelp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond all reach of hope or help;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such in a storm is Appledore.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis the sight of a lifetime to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great shorn sun as you see it now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across eight miles of undulant gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That widens landward, weltered and rolled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With freaks of shadow and crimson stains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the solid mountain brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it notches the disk, and gains and gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until there comes, you scarce know when,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tremble of fire o’er the parted lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of cloud and mountain, which vanishes; then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the body of day the sun-soul slips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the face of earth darkens; but now the strips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of western vapor, straight and thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which the horizon’s swervings win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grace of contrast, take fire and burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like splinters of touchwood, whose edges a mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ashes o’er feathers; northward turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For an instant, and let your eye grow cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Agamenticus, and when once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You look, ’tis as if the land-breeze, growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the smouldering brands the film were blowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brightening them down to the very core;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, they momently cool and dampen and deaden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crimson turns golden, the gold turns leaden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hardening into one black bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which, from the hollow heaven afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoots a splinter of light like diamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half seen, half fancied; by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond whatever is most beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the uttermost waste of desert sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows a star;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over it, visible spirit of dew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, stir not, speak not, hold your breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or surely the miracle vanisheth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The new moon, tranced in unspeakable blue!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No frail illusion; this were true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather, to call it the canoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hollowed out of a single pearl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That floats us from the Present’s whirl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to those beings which were ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When wishes were wingèd things like powers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call it not light, that mystery tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which broods upon the brooding ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flush of ecstasied surrender</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To indefinable emotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That glory, mellower than a mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pearl dissolved with amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which rims Square Rock, like what they paint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mitigated heavenly splendor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the stern forehead of a Saint!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No more a vision, reddened, largened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon dips toward her mountain nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, fringing it with palest argent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow sheathes herself behind the margent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that long cloud-bar in the West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose nether edge, erelong, you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silvery chrism in turn anoint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the tiniest rosy point</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touched doubtfully and timidly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the dark blue’s chilly strip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As some mute, wondering thing below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awakened by the thrilling glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might, looking up, see Dian dip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One lucent foot’s delaying tip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Latmian fountains long ago.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Knew you what silence was before?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is no startle of dreaming bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sings in his sleep, or strives to sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is no sough of branches stirred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor noise of any living thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as one hears by night on shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only, now and then, a sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fickle intervals between,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes far, and sometimes nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Andromeda might have heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fancied the huge sea-beast unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning in sleep; it is the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That welters and wavers uneasily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the lonely reefs of Appledore.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-wind-harp" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wind-Harp</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I treasure in secret some long, fine hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of tenderest brown, but so inwardly golden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I half used to fancy the sunshine there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shy, so shifting, so waywardly rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was only caught for the moment and holden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I could say <i>Dearest!</i> and kiss it, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pity let go to the summer again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I twisted this magic in gossamer strings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over a wind-harp’s Delphian hollow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then called to the idle breeze that swings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day in the pine-tops, and clings, and sings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid the musical leaves, and said, ‘Oh, follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The will of those tears that deepen my words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fly to my window to waken these chords.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So they trembled to life, and, doubtfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feeling their way to my sense, sang, ‘Say whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sit all day by the greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lover and loved, as it wont to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When we⁠—’ But grief conquered, and all together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They swelled such weird murmur as haunts a shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some planet dispeopled⁠—‘Nevermore!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from deep in the past, as seemed to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strings gathered sorrow and sang forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘One lover still waits ’neath the greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis dark,’ and they shuddered, ‘where lieth she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dark and cold! Forever must one be taken?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I groaned, ‘O harp of all ruth bereft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Scripture is sadder⁠—“the other left”!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There murmured, as if one strove to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tears came instead; then the sad tones wandered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faltered among the uncertain chords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a troubled doubt between sorrow and words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last with themselves they questioned and pondered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hereafter?⁠—who knoweth?’ and so they sighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the long steps that lead to silence and died.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="auf-wiedersehen" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Auf Wiedersehen</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Summer</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The little gate was reached at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half hid in lilacs down the lane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She pushed it wide, and, as she past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wistful look she backward cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With hand on latch, a vision white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lingered reluctant, and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half doubting if she did aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft as the dews that fell that night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She said⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lamp’s clear gleam flits up the stair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I linger in delicious pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, in that chamber, whose rich air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To breathe in thought I scarcely dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinks she⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen?</i>‘…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis thirteen years; once more I press</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The turf that silences the lane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear the rustle of her dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I smell the lilacs, and⁠—ah, yes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hear ‘<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sweet piece of bashful maiden art!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The English words had seemed too fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these⁠—they drew us heart to heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet held us tenderly apart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She said, ‘<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="palinode" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Palinode</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Autumn</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Still thirteen years: ’tis autumn now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On field and hill, in heart and brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naked trees at evening sough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaf to the forsaken bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sighs not⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two watched yon oriole’s pendent dome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That now is void, and dank with rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one⁠—oh, hope more frail than foam!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bird to his deserted home</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sings not⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The loath gate swings with rusty creak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once, parting there, we played at pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came a parting, when the weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fading lips essayed to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Somewhere is comfort, somewhere faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though thou in outer dark remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One sweet sad voice ennobles death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still, for eighteen centuries saith</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Softly⁠—’<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If earth another grave must bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet heaven hath won a sweeter strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something whispers my despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, from an orient chamber there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Floats down, ‘<i>Auf wiedersehen!</i>’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="after-the-burial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">After the Burial</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, faith is a goodly anchor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When skies are sweet as a psalm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bows it lolls so stalwart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its bluff, broad-shouldered calm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when over breakers to leeward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tattered surges are hurled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may keep our head to the tempest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its grip on the base of the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, after the shipwreck, tell me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What help in its iron thews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still true to the broken hawser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deep down among sea-weed and ooze?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the breaking gulfs of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the helpless feet stretch out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find in the deeps of darkness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No footing so solid as doubt,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then better one spar of Memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One broken plank of the Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our human heart may cling to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though hopeless of shore at last!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the spirit its splendid conjectures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the flesh its sweet despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its tears o’er the thin-worn locket</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its anguish of deathless hair!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Immortal? I feel it and know it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who doubts it of such as she?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that is the pang’s very secret⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Immortal away from me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There’s a narrow ridge in the graveyard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would scarce stay a child in his race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to me and my thought it is wider</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the star-sown vague of Space.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Your logic, my friend, is perfect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your moral most drearily true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, since the earth clashed on <i>her</i> coffin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I keep hearing that, and not you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Console if you will, I can bear it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis a well-meant alms of breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not all the preaching since Adam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has made Death other than Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is pagan; but wait till you feel it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That jar of our earth, that dull shock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the ploughshare of deeper passion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tears down to our primitive rock.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Communion in spirit! Forgive me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I, who am earthly and weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would give all my incomes from dreamland</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a touch of her hand on my cheek.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That little shoe in the corner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So worn and wrinkled and brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its emptiness confutes you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And argues your wisdom down.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-dead-house" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Dead House</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Here once my step was quickened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here beckoned the opening door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And welcome thrilled from the threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the foot it had known before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A glow came forth to meet me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the flame that laughed in the grate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shadows adance on the ceiling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Danced blither with mine for a mate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘I claim you, old friend,’ yawned the arm-chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘This corner, you know, is your seat;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Best your slippers on me,’ beamed the fender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘I brighten at touch of your feet.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘We know the practised finger,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Said the books, ‘that seems like brain;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the shy page rustled the secret</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It had kept till I came again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sang the pillow, ‘My down once quivered</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On nightingales’ throats that flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through moonlit gardens of Hafiz</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gather quaint dreams for you.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah me, where the Past sowed heart’s-ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Present plucks rue for us men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come back: that scar unhealing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was not in the churchyard then.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, I think, the house is unaltered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will go and beg to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the rooms that were once familiar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To my life as its bed to a brook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unaltered! Alas for the sameness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That makes the change but more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a dead man I see in the mirrors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis his tread that chills the floor!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To learn such a simple lesson,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Need I go to Paris and Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the many make the household,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But only one the home?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas just a womanly presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An influence unexprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a rose she had worn, on my gravesod</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were more than long life with the rest!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas a smile, ’twas a garment’s rustle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas nothing that I can phrase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the whole dumb dwelling grew conscious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put on her looks and ways.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Were it mine I would close the shutters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like lids when the life is fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the funeral fire should wind it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This corpse of a home that is dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For it died that autumn morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she, its soul, was borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lie all dark on the hillside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That looks over woodland and corn.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-mood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Mood</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I go to the ridge in the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I haunted in days gone by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou, O Memory, pourest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No magical drop in mine eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the gleam of the secret restorest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath faded from earth and sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Presence autumnal and sober</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invests every rock and tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the aureole of October</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lights the maples, but darkens me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pine in the distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patient through sun or rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meeting with graceful persistence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With yielding but rooted resistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The northwind’s wrench and strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No memory of past existence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings thee pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right for the zenith heading,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friendly with heat or cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine arms to the influence spreading</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the heavens, just from of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou only aspirest the more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unregretful the old leaves shedding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fringed thee with music before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deeper thy roots embedding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the grace and the beauty of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sigh’st not, ‘Alas, I am older,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green of last summer is sear!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But loftier, hopefuller, bolder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winnest broader horizons each year.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To me ’tis not cheer thou art singing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s a sound of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O mournful tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy boughs forever clinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the far-off roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of waves on the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shattered vessel flinging.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thou musest still of the ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which thou must float at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seem’st to foreknow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shipwreck’s woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sailor wrenched from the broken mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do I, in this vague emotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sadness that will not pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the air throb with wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the field laughs and sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do I forebode, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship-building longer and wearier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voyage’s struggle and strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the darker and drearier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wreck of a broken life?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-voyage-to-vinland" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Voyage to Vinland</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Biörn’s Beckoners</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now Biörn, the son of Heriulf, had ill days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the heart within him seethed with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would not be allayed with any toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether of war or hunting or the oar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was anhungered for some joy untried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the brain grew not weary with the limbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, while they slept, still hammered like a Troll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Building all night a bridge of solid dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between him and some purpose of his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or will to find a purpose. With the dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleep-laid timbers, crumbled to soft mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Denied all foothold. But the dream remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every night with yellow-bearded kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sleep was haunted⁠—mighty men of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once young as he, now ancient like the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And safe as stars in all men’s memories.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange sagas read he in their sea-blue eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold as the sea, grandly compassionless;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like life, they made him eager and then mocked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, broad awake, they would not let him be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shaped themselves gigantic in the mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rose far-beckoning in the lamps of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They whispered invitation in the winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breath came from them, mightier than the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To strain the lagging sails of his resolve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that grew passion which before was wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And youth seemed all too costly to be staked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the soiled cards wherewith men played their game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Letting Time pocket up the larger life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost with base gain of raiment, food, and roof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘What helpeth lightness of the feet?’ they said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Oblivion runs with swifter foot than they;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or strength of sinew? New men come as strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those sleep nameless; or renown in war?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swords grave no name on the long-memoried rock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But moss shall hide it; they alone who wring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some secret purpose from the unwilling gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Survive in song for yet a little while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vex, like us, the dreams of later men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves a dream, and dreamlike all we did.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Thorwald’s Lay</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Biörn went comfortless but for his thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by his thought the more discomforted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Erle Thurlson kept his Yule-tide feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thither came he, called among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent, lone-minded, a church-door to mirth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ere deep draughts forbade such serious song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the grave Skald might chant nor after blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Eric looked at Thorwald where he sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute as a cloud amid the stormy hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: ‘O Skald, sing now an olden song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as our fathers heard who led great lives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the bravest on a shield is borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the waving host that shouts him king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rode their thrones upon the thronging seas!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the old man arose; white-haired he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White-bearded, and with eyes that looked afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their still region of perpetual snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the little smokes and stirs of men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head was bowed with gathered flakes of years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As winter bends the sea-foreboding pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But something triumphed in his brow and eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which whoso saw it could not see and crouch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud rang the emptied beakers as he mused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brooding his eyried thoughts; then, as an eagle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circles smooth-winged above the wind-vexed woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wheeled his soul into the air of song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High o’er the stormy hall; and thus he sang:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘The fletcher for his arrow-shaft picks out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wood closest-grained, long-seasoned, straight as light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from a quiver full of such as these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wary bowman, matched against his peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long doubting, singles yet once more the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is it needs such flawless shafts as Fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What archer of his arrows is so choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hits the white so surely? They are men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chosen of her quiver; nor for her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will every reed suffice, or cross-grained stick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At random from life’s vulgar fagot plucked:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such answer household ends; but she will have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls straight and clear, of toughest fibre, sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the heart of heart; from these she strips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All needless stuff, all sapwood; seasons them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From circumstance untoward feathers plucks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crumpled and cheap; and barbs with iron will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hour that passes is her quiver-boy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she draws bow, ’tis not across the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ’gainst the sun her haste-snatched arrow sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sun and wind have plighted faith to her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere men have heard the sinew twang, behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the butt’s heart her trembling messenger!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘The song is old and simple that I sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But old and simple are despised as cheap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hardest to achieve of human things:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good were the days of yore, when men were tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By ring of shields, as now by ring of words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But while the gods are left, and hearts of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wide-doored ocean, still the days are good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still o’er the earth hastes Opportunity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking the hardy soul that seeks for her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be not abroad, nor deaf with household cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chatter loudest as they mean the least;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift-willed is thrice-willed; late means nevermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatient is her foot, nor turns again.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ceased; upon his bosom sank his beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sadly, as one who oft had seen her pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stayed her: and forthwith the frothy tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of interrupted wassail roared along.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Biörn, the son of Heriulf, sat apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Musing, and, with his eyes upon the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw shapes of arrows, lost as soon as seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘A ship,’ he muttered,’is a wingèd bridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That leadeth every way to man’s desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ocean the wide gate to manful luck.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then with that resolve his heart was bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, like a humming shaft, through many a stripe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of day and night, across the unpathwayed seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot the brave prow that cut on Vinland sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first rune in the Saga of the West.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Gudrida’s Prophecy</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Four weeks they sailed, a speck in sky-shut seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life, where was never life that knew itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tumbled lubber-like in blowing whales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought, where the like had never been before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Thought primeval brooded the abyss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone as men were never in the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saw the icy foundlings of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White cliffs of silence, beautiful by day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or looming, sudden-perilous, at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In monstrous hush; or sometimes in the dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waves broke ominous with paly gleams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crushed by the prow in sparkles of cold fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came green stripes of sea that promised land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But brought it not, and on the thirtieth day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low in the west were wooded shores like cloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shouted as men shout with sudden hope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Biörn was silent, such strange loss there is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the dream’s fulfilment and the dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such sad abatement in the goal attained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Gudrida, that was a prophetess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapt with strange influence from Atlantis, sang:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her words: the vision was the dreaming shore’s.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Looms there the New Land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Locked in the shadow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long the gods shut it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Niggards of newness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, the o’er-old.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Little it looks there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slim as a cloud-streak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It shall fold peoples</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a shepherd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foldeth his flock.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Silent it sleeps now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great ships shall seek it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swarming as salmon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noise of its numbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two seas shall hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Men from the Northland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men from the Southland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Haste empty-handed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more than manhood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring they, and hands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Dark hair and fair hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Red blood and blue blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall be mingled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Force of the ferment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes the New Man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Pick of all kindreds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kings’ blood shall theirs be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shoots of the eldest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stock upon Midgard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sons of the poor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Them waits the New Land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shall subdue it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving their sons’ sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Space for the body,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Space for the soul.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Leaving their sons’ sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things save song-craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plant long in growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrusting its tap-root</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deep in the Gone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here men shall grow up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong from self-helping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eyes for the present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring they as eagles’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blind to the Past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They shall make over</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creed, law, and custom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Driving-men, doughty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Builders of empire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Builders of men.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here is no singer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What should they sing of?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, the unresting?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Labor is ugly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loathsome is change.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These the old gods hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwellers in dream-land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drinking delusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the empty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Skull of the Past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These hate the old gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warring against them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fatal to Odin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here the wolf Fenrir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lieth in wait.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here the gods’ Twilight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathers, earth-gulfing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blackness of battle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fierce till the Old World</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flare up in fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Doubt not, my Northmen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fate loves the fearless;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fools, when their roof-tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falls, think it doomsday;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Firm stands the sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Over the ruin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See I the promise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crisp waves the cornfield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace-walled, the homestead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waits open-doored.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There lies the New Land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yours to behold it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to possess it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slowly Fate’s perfect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fulness shall come.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then from your strong loins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seed shall be scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men to the marrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wilderness tamers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walkers of waves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Jealous, the old gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shut it in shadow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wisely they ward it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Egg of the serpent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bane to them all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Stronger and sweeter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New gods shall seek it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fill it with man-folk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wise for the future,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wise from the past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here all is all men’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save only Wisdom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">King he that wins her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him hail they helmsman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Highest of heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Might makes no master</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here any longer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sword is not swayer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here e’en the gods are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Selfish no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Walking the New Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo, a divine One</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greets all men godlike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calls them his kindred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, the Divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Is it Thor’s hammer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rays in his right hand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weaponless walks he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is the White Christ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stronger than Thor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here shall a realm rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mighty in manhood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice and Mercy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here set a stronghold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Safe without spear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Weak was the Old World,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wearily war-fenced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of its ashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong as the morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Springeth the New.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Beauty of promise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Promise of beauty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Safe in the silence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleep thou, till cometh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light to thy lids!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thee shall awaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flame from the furnace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bath of all brave ones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cleanser of conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Welder of will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Lowly shall love thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, open-handed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stalwart shall shield thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, worth their best blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waif of the West!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then shall come singers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing no swan-song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Birth-carols, rather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meet for the mail child</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mighty of bone.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="mahmood-the-image-breaker" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mahmood the Image-Breaker</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Old events have modern meanings; only that survives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of past history which finds kindred in all hearts and lives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mahmood once, the idol-breaker, spreader of the Faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was at Sumnat tempted sorely, as the legend saith.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the great pagoda’s centre, monstrous and abhorred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Granite on a throne of granite, sat the temple’s lord,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mahmood paused a moment, silenced by the silent face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, with eyes of stone unwavering, awed the ancient place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the Brahmins knelt before him, by his doubt made bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pledging for their idol’s ransom countless gems and gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gold was yellow dirt to Mahmood, but of precious use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since from it the roots of power suck a potent juice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Were yon stone alone in question, this would please me well,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mahmood said; ‘but, with the block there, I my truth must sell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Wealth and rule slip down with Fortune, as her wheel turns round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who keeps his faith, he only cannot be discrowned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Little were a change of station, loss of life or crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the wreck were past retrieving if the Man fell down.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So his iron mace he lifted, smote with might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the idol, on the pavement tumbling, burst in twain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Luck obeys the downright striker; from the hollow core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty times the Brahmins’ offer deluged all the floor.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-fountain-of-youth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fountain of Youth</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By no sadder spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than blackbirds and thrushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whistle to cheer it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All day in the bushes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This woodland is haunted:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a small clearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond sight or hearing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human annoyance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little fount gushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First smoothly, then dashes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gurgles and flashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the maples and ashes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confiding its joyance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unconscious confiding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, silent and glossy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slips winding and hiding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through alder-stems mossy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through gossamer roots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fine as nerves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tremble, as shoots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through their magnetized curves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The allurement delicious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the water’s capricious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrills, gushes, and swerves.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am writing no fiction;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this fount, its sole daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the woodland was granted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pour holy water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And win benediction;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In summer-noon flushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all the wood hushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue dragon-flies knitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To and fro in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sidelong jerk flitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sink down on the rashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, motionless sitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear it bubble and run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear its low inward singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With level wings swinging</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On green tasselled rushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dream in the sun.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great August noonlight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through myriad rifts slanted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaf and bole thickly sprinkles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flickering gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, in warm August gloaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quick, silent brightenings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From meadow-lands roaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The firefly twinkles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fitful heat-lightnings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the magical moonlight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With meek, saintly glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steeps summit and wold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There whippoorwills plain in the solitudes hoary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lone cries that wander</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now hither, now yonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like souls doomed of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a mild purgatory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through noonlight and moonlight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little fount tinkles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its silver saints’-bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no sprite ill-boding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May make his abode in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those innocent dells.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the phebe scarce whistles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once an hour to his fellow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, where red lilies flaunted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balloons from the thistles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell summer’s disasters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The butterflies yellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As caught in an eddy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of air’s silent ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sink, waver, and steady</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er goats’-beard and asters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like souls of dead flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With aimless emotion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still lingering unready</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave their old bowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fount is no dumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still gleams and flashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gurgles and plashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the measure of summer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The butterflies hear it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spell-bound are holden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still balancing near it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the goats’ beard so golden.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vast silver willow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not how planted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This wood is enchanted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of surprises.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands stemming a billow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A motionless billow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ankle-deep mosses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two great roots it crosses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a round basin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there the Fount rises;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, too pure a mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one sick of error</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his sad face in!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No dew-drop is stiller</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In its lupin-leaf setting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than this water moss-bounded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a tiny sand-pillar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the bottom keeps jetting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mermaid ne’er sounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the wreaths of a shell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down amid crimson dulses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some cavern of ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A melody sweeter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the delicate pulses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soft, noiseless metre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pause and the swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that musical motion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I recall it, not see it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could vision be clearer?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half I’m fain to draw nearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half tempted to flee it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleeping Past wake not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One forward step take not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! break not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That quietude rare!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my step unaffrighted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thrush hops before it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A birch hangs delighted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dipping, dipping, dipping its tremulous hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pure as the fountain, once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came to the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(How dare I draw nearer?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bent o’er its mirror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw a child’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mid locks of bright gold in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, pure as this fountain once⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, bow much error!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too holy a mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the man to behold in it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His harsh, bearded countenance!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, fly unreturning!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet stay;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where wonderful chances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have sway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Luck flees from the cold one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But leaps to the bold one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I be daunted?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still the smooth mirror glances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still the amber sand dances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One look⁠—then away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O magical glass!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst keep in thy bosom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shades of leaf and of blossom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When summer days pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that when thy wave hardens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shapes as it pleases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unharmed by the breezes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its fine hanging gardens?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast those in thy keeping.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And canst not uncover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchantedly sleeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old shade of thy lover?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is there! I have found it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wakes, the long sleeper!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pool is grown deeper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sand dance is ending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white floor sinks, blending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With skies that below me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are deepening and bending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a child’s face alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seems not to know me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hair that fades golden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the heaven-glow round it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looks up at my own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, glimpse through the portal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That leads to the throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That opes the child’s olden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regions Elysian!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, too holy vision</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thy skirts to be holden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By soiled hand of mortal!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It wavers, it scatters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis gone past recalling!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tear’s sudden falling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The magic cup shatters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breaks the spell of the waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sand cone once more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a ceaseless renewing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its dance is pursuing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the silvery floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er and o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a noiseless and ceaseless renewing.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a woodland enchanted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you ask me, <i>Where is it?</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can but make answer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘ ’Tis past my disclosing;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to choice is it granted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sure paths to visit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The still pool enclosing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its blithe little dancer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in some day, the rarest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many Septembers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the pulses of air rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all things lie dreaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In drowsy haze steaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the wood’s glowing embers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, sometimes, unheeding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asking not whither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a sweet inward leading</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My feet are drawn thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, looking with awe in the magical mirror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see through my tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half doubtful of seeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face unperverted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warm golden being</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a child of five years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spite of the mists and the error.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the days overcast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can feel that I walk undeserted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forever attended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the glad heavens that bended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the innocent past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward fancy or truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth the sweet vision win me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dare I think that I cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fountain of youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fleeting reflection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some bygone perfection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still lingers in me?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="yussouf" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Yussouf</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A stranger came one night to Yussouf’s tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, ‘Behold one outcast and in dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against whose life the bow of power is bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who flies, and hath not where to lay his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come to thee for shelter and for food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Yussouf, called through all our tribes “The Good.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘This tent is mine,’ said Yussouf, ‘but no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than it is God’s come in and be at peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely shall thou partake of all my store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I of His who buildeth over these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our tents his glorious roof of night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at whose door none ever yet heard Nay.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Yussouf entertained his guest that night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, waking him ere day, said: ‘Here is gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My swiftest horse is saddled for thy flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart before the prying day grow bold.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one lamp lights another, nor grows less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So nobleness enkindleth nobleness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That inward light the stranger’s face made grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shines from all self-conquest; kneeling low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bowed his forehead upon Yussouf’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sobbing: ‘O Sheik, I cannot leave thee so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will repay thee; all this thou hast done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto that Ibrahim who slew thy son!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Take thrice the gold,’ said Yussouf ‘for with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the desert, never to return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My one black thought shall ride away from me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First-born, for whom by day and night I yearn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balanced and just are all of God’s decrees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art avenged, my first-born, sleep in peace!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-darkened-mind" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Darkened Mind</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The fire is turning clear and blithely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasantly whistles the winter wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are about thee, thy friends and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On us all flickers the firelight kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There thou sittest in thy wonted corner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lone and awful in thy darkened mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There thou sittest; now and then thou moanest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dost talk with what we cannot see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lookest at us with an eye so doubtful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It doth put us very far from thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There thou sittest; we would fain be nigh thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we know that it can never be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We can touch thee, still we are no nearer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather round thee, still thou art alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide chasm of reason is between us;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou confutest kindness with a moan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We can speak to thee, and thou canst answer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two prisoners through a wall of stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hardest heart would call it very awful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou look’st at us and seest⁠—oh, what?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we move away, thou sittest gazing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those vague eyes at the selfsame spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou mutterest, thy hands thou wringest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing something⁠—us thou seest not.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strange it is that, in this open brightness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shouldst sit in such a narrow cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange it is that thou shouldst be so lonesome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where those are who love thee all so well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so much of thee is left among us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the hum outliving the hushed bell.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-rabbi-jehosha-said" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What Rabbi Jehosha Said</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Rabbi Jehosha used to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That God made angels every day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perfect as Michael and the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First brooded in creation’s nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose only office was to cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Hosanna!</i> once, and then to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rather, with Life’s essence blent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be led home from banishment.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rabbi Jehosha had the skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know that Heaven is in God’s will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doing that, though for a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One heart-beat long, may win a grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As full of grandeur and of glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Princes of the Chariot know.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twere glorious, no doubt, to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the strong-winged Hierarchy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To burn with Seraphs, or to shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Cherubs, deathlessly divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I, perhaps, poor earthly clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I forget myself in God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I but find my nature’s clue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Simply as birds and blossoms do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but for one rapt moment know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis Heaven must come, not we must go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should win my place as near the throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the pearl-angel of its zone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God would listen mid the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my one breath of perfect song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, in its simple human way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said all the Host of Heaven could say.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="all-saints" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">All-Saints</h2>
			<p>
				<span>One feast, of holy days the crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, though no Churchman, love to keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All-Saints⁠—the unknown good that rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In God’s still memory folded deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravely dumb that did their deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scorned to blot it with a name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men of the plain heroic breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That loved Heaven’s silence more than fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such lived not in the past alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thread to-day the unheeding street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stairs to Sin and Famine known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sing with the welcome of their feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The den they enter grows a shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The grimy sash an oriel burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cup of water warms like wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their speech is filled from heavenly urns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>About their brows to me appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An aureole traced in tenderest light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rainbow-gleam of smiles through tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In dying eyes, by them made bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of souls that shivered on the edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that chill ford repassed no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their mercy felt the pledge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sweetness of the farther shore.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-winter-evening-hymn-to-my-fire" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Winter-Evening Hymn to My Fire</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Beauty on my hearth-stone blazing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-night the triple Zoroaster</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall my prophet be and master;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-night will I pure Magian be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hymns to thy sole honor raising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While thou leapest fast and faster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild with self-delighted glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sink’st low and glowest faintly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As an aureole still and saintly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeping cadence to my praising</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee! still thee! and only thee!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Elfish daughter of Apollo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, from thy father stolen and bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve in Vulcan’s clangorous smithy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prometheus (primal Yankee) found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when he had tampered with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Too confiding little maid!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a reed’s precarious hollow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our frozen earth conveyed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he swore I know not what;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endless ease should be thy lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure that should never falter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifelong play, and not a duty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save to hover o’er the altar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vision of celestial beauty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fed with precious woods and spices;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, perfidious! having got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee in the net of his devices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sold thee into endless slavery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made thee a drudge to boil the pot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, Helios’ daughter, who dost bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His likeness in thy golden hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, by nature wild and wavery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Palpitating, evanescent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the shade of Dian’s crescent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life, motion, gladness, everywhere!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fathom deep men bury thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the furnace dark and still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, with dreariest mockery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making thee eat, against thy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blackest Pennsylvanian stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou dost avenge thy doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, from out thy catacomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Day and night thy wrath is blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a withering simoom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, adown that cavern drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy black pitfall in the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Staggers the lusty antique cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despairing, and is seen no more!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Elfish I may rightly name thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We enslave, but cannot tame thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fierce snatches, now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou pluckest at thy right again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy down-trod instincts savage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stealthy insurrection creep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While thy wittol masters sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burst in undiscerning ravage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then how thou shak’st thy bacchant locks!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While brazen pulses, far and near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throb thick and thicker, wild with fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dread conjecture, till the drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disordered clangor every steeple rocks!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But when we make a friend of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And admit thee to the hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On our nights of festival,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, Cinderella, who could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thee the kitchen’s stunted thrall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more a Princess lithe and tan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dancest with a whispering tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the bright marvel of thy head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In crinkling gold floats all abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gloriously dost vindicate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The legend of thy lineage great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth-exiled daughter of the Pythian god!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in the ample chimney-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To honor thy acknowledged race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We crown thee high with laurel good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy shining father’s sacred wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, guessing thy ancestral right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sparkles and snaps its dumb delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, at thy touch, poor outcast one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feels through its gladdened fibres go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tingle and thrill and vassal glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of instincts loyal to the sun.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O thou of home the guardian Lar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when our earth hath wandered far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the cold, and deep snow covers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The walks of our New England lovers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sweet secluded evening-star!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas with thy rays the English Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ripened her mild domestic hues;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas by thy flicker that she conned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fireside wisdom that enrings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With light from heaven familiar things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee she found the homely faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose mild eyes thy comfort stay’th</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Death, extinguishing his torch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gropes for the latch-string in the porch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love that wanders not beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His earliest nest, but sits and sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While children smooth his patient wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore with thee I love to read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our brave old poets; at thy touch how stirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life in the withered words: how swift recede</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s shadows; and how glows again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through its dead mass the incandescent verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when upon the anvils of the brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It glittering lay, cyclopically wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the fast-throbbing hammers of the poet’s thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou murmurest, too, divinely stirred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aspirations unattained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rhythms so rathe and delicate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bent and strained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broke, beneath the sombre weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any airiest mortal word.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What warm protection dost thou bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round curtained talk of friend with friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the gray snow-storm, held aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To softest outline rounds the roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the rude North with baffled strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoulders the frost-starred window-pane!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the kind nymph to Bacchus born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Morpheus’ daughter, she that seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gifted opon her natal morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him with fire, by her with dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nicotia, dearer to the Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than all the grape’s bewildering juice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We worship, unforbid of thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as her incense floats and curls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In airy spires and wayward whirls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or poises on its tremulous stalk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flower of frailest revery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So winds and loiters, idly free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The current of unguided talk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now laughter-rippled, and now caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In smooth, dark pools of deeper thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile thou mellowest every word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sweetly unobtrusive third;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou hast magic beyond wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unlock natures each to each;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unspoken thought thou canst divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou fill’st the pauses of the speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whispers that to dream-land reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And frozen fancy-springs unchain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Arctic outskirts of the brain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sun of all inmost confidences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy rays doth the heart unclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its formal calyx of pretences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That close against rude day’s offences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And open its shy midnight rose!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou holdest not the master key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which thy Sire sets free the mystic gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Past and Future: not for common fates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do they wide open fling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with a far heard ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swing back their willing valves melodiously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to ceremonial days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great processions of imperial song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That set the world at gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth such high privilege belong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou a postern-door canst ope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To humbler chambers of the selfsame palace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Memory lodges, and her sister Hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose being is but as a crystal chalice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, with her various mood, the elder fills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy or sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So coloring as she wills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hues of yesterday the unconscious morrow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou sinkest, and my fancy sinks with thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee I took the idle shell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And struck the unused chords again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they are gone who listened well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some are in heaven, and all are far from me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as I sing, it turns to pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with vain tears my eyelids throb and swell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough; I come not of the race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hawk their sorrows in the market-place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth stops the ears I best had loved to please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then break, ye untuned chords, or rust in peace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if a white-haired actor should come back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some midnight to the theatre void and black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there rehearse his youth’s great part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mid thin applauses of the ghosts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So seems it now: ye crowd upon my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I bow down in silence, shadowy hosts!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="fancys-casuistry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fancy’s Casuistry</h2>
			<p>
				<span>How struggles with the tempest’s swells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That warning of tumultuous bells!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire is loose! and frantic knells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throb fast and faster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As tower to tower confusedly tells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">News of disaster.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But on my far-off solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No harsh alarums can intrude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terror comes to me subdued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And charmed by distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deepen the habitual mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my existence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Are those, I muse, the Easter chimes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listen, weaving careless rhymes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the loud city’s griefs and crimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pay gentle allegiance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fine quiet that sublimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These dreamy regions.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when the storm o’erwhelms the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watch entranced as, o’er and o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light revolves amid the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So still and saintly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now large and near, now more and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withdrawing faintly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This, too, despairing sailors see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flash out the breakers ’neath their lee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sudden snow, then lingeringly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wane tow’rd eclipse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While through the dark the shuddering sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gropes for the ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And is it right, this mood of mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thus, in revery enshrined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can in the world mere topics find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For musing stricture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing the life of humankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only as picture?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The events in line of battle go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain for me their trumpets blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As unto him that lieth low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In death’s dark arches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the sod hears throbbing slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The muffled marches.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Duty, am I dead to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this my cloistered ecstasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this lone shallop on the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That drifts tow’rd Silence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are those visioned shores I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But sirens’ islands?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My Dante frowns with lip-locked mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As who would say, ‘ ’Tis those, I ween,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom lifelong armor-chafe makes lean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That win the laurel;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But where <i>is</i> Truth? What does it mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world-old quarrel?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such questionings are idle air:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave what to do and what to spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the inspiring moment’s care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ask for payment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fame or gold, but just to wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unspotted raiment.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-mr-john-bartlett" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Mr. John Bartlett</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Who Had Sent Me a Seven-Pound Trout</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><span>Fit for an Abbot of Theleme,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">For the whole Cardinals’ College, or</span><br/>
			<span>The Pope himself to see in dream</span><br/>
			<span>Before his lenten vision gleam.</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">He lies there, the sogdologer!</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>His precious flanks with stars besprent,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Worthy to swim in Castaly!</span><br/>
			<span>The friend by whom such gifts are sent,</span><br/>
			<span>For him shall bumpers full be spent,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">His health! be Luck his fast ally!</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>I see him trace the wayward brook</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Amid the forest mysteries,</span><br/>
			<span>Where at their shades shy aspens look.</span><br/>
			<span>Or where, with many a gurgling crook,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">It croons its woodland histories.</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>I see leaf-shade and sun-fleck lend</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Their tremulous, sweet vicissitude</span><br/>
			<span>To smooth, dark pool, to crinkling bend⁠—</span><br/>
			<span>(Oh, stew him, Ann, as ’twere your friend,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">With amorous solicitude!)</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>I see him step with caution due,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Soft as if shod with moccasins,</span><br/>
			<span>Grave as in church, for who plies you,</span><br/>
			<span>Sweet craft, is safe as in a pew</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">From all our common stock o’ sins.</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>The unerring fly I see him cast,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">That as a rose-leaf falls as soft,</span><br/>
			<span>A flash! a whirl! he has him fast!</span><br/>
			<span>We tyros, how that struggle last</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Confuses and appalls us oft.</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>Unfluttered he: calm as the sky</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Looks on our tragi-comedies,</span><br/>
			<span>This way and that he lets him fly,</span><br/>
			<span>A sunbeam-shuttle, then to die</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Lands him, with cool <i>aplomb</i>, at ease.</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>The friend who gave our board such gust,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Life’s care may he o’erstep it half,</span><br/>
			<span>And, when Death hooks him, as he must,</span><br/>
			<span>He’ll do it handsomely, I trust,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">And John H⁠⸺ write his epitaph!</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>Oh, born beneath the Fishes’ sign,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">Of constellations happiest,</span><br/>
			<span>May he somewhere with Walton dine,</span><br/>
			<span>May Horace send him Massic wine,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">And Burns Scotch drink, the nappiest!</span> class=”i1”</p>
			<p><span>And when they come his deeds to weigh,</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">And how he used the talents his,</span><br/>
			<span>One trout-scale in the scales he’ll lay</span><br/>
			<span>(If trout had scales), and ’twill outsway</span><br/>
			<span class="i1">The wrong side of the balances.</span> class=”i1”</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-to-happiness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode to Happiness</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Spirit, that rarely comest now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only to contrast my gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like rainbow-feathered birds that bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment on some autumn bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, with the spurn of their farewell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheds its last leaves⁠—thou once didst dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With me year-long, and make intense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To boyhood’s wisely vacant days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fleet but all-sufficing grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of trustful inexperience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While soul could still transfigure sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrill, as with love’s first caress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At life’s mere unexpectedness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Days when my blood would leap and run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As full of sunshine as a breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or spray tossed up by Summer seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That doubts if it be sea or sun!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days that flew swiftly like the band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That played in Grecian games at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passed from eager hand to hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The onward-dancing torch of life!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wing-footed! thou abid’st with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who asks it not; but he who hath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watched o’er the waves thy waning path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall nevermore behold returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy high-heaped canvas shoreward yearning!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou first reveal’st to us thy face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned o’er the shoulder’s parting grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A moment glimpsed, then seen no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou whose swift footsteps we can trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away from every mortal door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nymph of the unreturning feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How may I win thee back? But no,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I do thee wrong to call thee so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis I am changed, not thou art fleet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man thy presence feels again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in the blood, but in the brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit, that lov’st the upper air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serene and passionless and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as on mountain heights we find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wide-viewed uplands of the mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or such as scorns to coil and sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round any but the eagle’s wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of souls that with long upward beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have won an undisturbed retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, poised like wingèd victories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mirror in relentless eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The life broad-basking ’neath their feet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man ever with his Now at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pained with first gasps of earthly air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then praying Death the last to spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still fearful of the ampler life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not unto them dost thou consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, passionless, can lead at ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life of unalloyed content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A life like that of land-locked seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who feel no elemental gush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tidal forces, no fierce rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of storm deep-grasping scarcely spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt continent and continent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such quiet souls have never known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy truer inspiration, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lov’st to feel upon thy brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spray from the plunging vessel thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grazing the tusked lee shore, the cliff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That o’er the abrupt gorge holds its breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the frail hair-breadth of an <i>if</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is all that sunders life and death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, too, are cared for, and round these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bends her mild crook thy sister Peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These in unvexed dependence lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each ’neath his strip of household sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er these clouds wander, and the blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs motionless the whole day through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stars rise for them, and moons grow large</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lessen in such tranquil wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As joys and sorrows do that rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within their nature’s sheltered marge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hours into each other flit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the leaf-shadows of the vine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fig-tree under which they sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their still lives to heaven incline</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With an unconscious habitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unhistoried as smokes that rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From happy hearths and sight elude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In kindred blue of morning skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wayward! when once we feel thy lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis worse than vain to woo thee back!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet there is one who seems to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine elder sister, in whose eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A faint far northern light will rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes, and bring a dream of thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is not that for which youth hoped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she hath blessings all her own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughts pure as lilies newly oped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faith to sorrow given alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost I deem that it is thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come back with graver matron brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With deepened eyes and bated breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like one that somewhere hath met Death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ‘No,’ she answers, ‘I am she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom the gods love, Tranquillity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other whom you seek forlorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half earthly was; but I am born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the immortals, and our race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wears still some sadness on its face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wins me late, but keeps me long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, dowered with every gift of passion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that fierce flame can forge and fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sin and self the anchor strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can thence compel the driving force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of daily life’s mechanic course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor less the nobler energies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of needful toil and culture wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose soul is worth the tempter’s lure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can renounce, and yet endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him I come, not lightly wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But won by silent fortitude.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="villa-franca" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Villa Franca</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">1859</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wait a little: do <i>we</i> not wait?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louis Napoleon is not Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Francis Joseph is not Time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s One hath swifter feet than Crime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannon-parliaments settle naught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venice is Austria’s⁠—whose is Thought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minié is good, but, spite of change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gutenberg’s gun has the longest range.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the shadow, year out, year in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silent headsman waits forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wait, we say: our years are long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men are weak, out Man is strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the stars first curved their rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have looked on many things:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great wars come and great wars go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wolf-tracks light on polar snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall see him come and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This second-hand Napoleon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the shadow, year out, year in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silent headsman waits forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We saw the elder Corsican,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Clotho muttered as she span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While crowned lackeys bore the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the pinchbeck Charlemagne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sister, stint not length of thread!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sister, stay the scissors dread!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Saint Helen’s granite Weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark, the vulture whets his beak!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the shadow, year out, year in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silent headsman waits forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Bonapartes, we know their bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wade in honey red to the knees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their patent reaper, its sheaves sleep sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dreamless garners underground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know false glory’s spendthrift race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pawning nations for feathers and lace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be short, it may be long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘ ’Tis reckoning-day!’ sneers unpaid Wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the shadow, year out, year in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silent headsman waits forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cock that wears the Eagle’s skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can promise what he ne’er could win;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slavery reaped for fine words sown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>System for all, and rights for none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despots atop, a wild clan below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is the Gaul from long ago;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash the black from the Ethiop’s face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash the past out of man or race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the shadow, year out, year in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silent headsman waits forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Neath Gregory’s throne a spider swings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snares the people for the kings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Luther is dead; old quarrels pass:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stake’s black scars are healed with grass;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dreamers prate; did man e’er live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw priest or woman yet forgive?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Luther’s broom is left, and eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peep o’er their creeds to where it lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the shadow, year out, year in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silent headsman waits forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Smooth sails the ship of either realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kaiser and Jesuit at the helm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We look down the depths, and mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent workers in the dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Building slow the sharp-tusked reefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old instincts hardening to new beliefs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patience a little; learn to wait;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hours are long on the clock of Fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spin, spin, Clotho, spin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lachesis, twist! and, Atropos, sever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Darkness is strong, and so is Sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But surely God endures forever!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-miner" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Miner</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Down ‘mid the tangled roots of things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That coil about the central fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seek for that which giveth wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stoop, not soar, to my desire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes I hear, as ’twere a sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sea’s deep yearning far above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou hast the secret not,’ I cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘In deeper deeps is hid my Love.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They think I burrow from the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In darkness, all alone, and weak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such loss were gain if He were won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’tis the sun’s own Sun I seek.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘The earth,’ they murmur, ‘is the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That vainly sought his life to prison;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why grovel longer in the gloom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is not here; he hath arisen.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>More life for me where he hath lain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hidden while ye believed him dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in cathedrals cold and vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Built on loose sands of <i>It is said</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My search is for the living gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him I desire who dwells recluse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not his image worn and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Day-servant of our sordid use.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If him I find not, yet I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ancient joy of cell and church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glimpse, the surety undefined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unquenched ardor of the search.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Happier to chase a flying goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to sit counting laurelled gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guess the Soul within the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to be lord of what remains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hide still, best Good, in subtile wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond my nature’s utmost scope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ever absent from mine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be twice present in my hope!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="gold-egg-a-dream-fantasy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Gold Egg: A Dream-Fantasy</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">How a student in search of the beautiful fell asleep in Dresden over Herr Professor Doctor Vischer’s Wissenschaft Des Schönen, and what came thereof</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>I swam with undulation soft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adrift on Vischer’s ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, from my cockboat up aloft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent down my mental plummet oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hope to reach a notion.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But from the metaphysic sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No bottom was forthcoming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the while (how drearily!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one eternal note of B</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My German stove kept humming.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘What’s Beauty?’ mused I; ‘is it told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By synthesis? analysis?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have you not made us lead of gold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feed your crucible, not sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our temple’s sacred chalices?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then o’er my senses came a change;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My book seemed all traditions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old legends of profoundest range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diablery, and stories strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of goblins, elves, magicians.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old gods in modern saints I found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old creeds in strange disguises;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought them safely underground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here they were, all safe and sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a sign of phthisis.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Truth was, my outward eyes were closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although I did not know it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep into dream-land I had dozed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus was happily transposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From proser into poet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So what I read took flesh and blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turned to living creatures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words were but the dingy bud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bloomed, like Adam, from the mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To human forms and features.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I saw how Zeus was lodged once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Baucis and Philemon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The text said, ‘Not alone of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But every day, at every door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knocks still the masking Demon.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><b>Daimon</b> ’twas printed in the book</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as I read it slowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The letters stirred and changed, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s stature, the Olympian look</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of painless melancholy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He paused upon the threshold worn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘With coin I cannot pay you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would I fain make some return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gift for cheapness do not spurn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accept this hen, I pray you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Plain feathers wears my Hemera,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has from ages olden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She makes her nest in common hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, of all the birds that lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her eggs alone are golden.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He turned, and could no more be seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Bancis stared a moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then tossed poor Partlet on the green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a tone, half jest, half spleen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus made her housewife’s comment:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘The stranger had a queerish face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His smile was hardly pleasant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though he meant it for a grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this old hen of barnyard race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was but a stingy present.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘She’s quite too old for laying eggs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, even to make a soup of;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One only needs to see her legs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You might as well boil down the pegs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I made the brood-hen’s coop of!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Some eighteen score of such do I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raise every year, her sisters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, in the woods your fortunes try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day for one poor earthworm pry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scratch your toes to blisters!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Philemon found the rede was good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, turning on the poor hen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He clapt his hands, and stamped, and shooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting the exile tow’rd the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To house with snipe and moorhen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A poet saw and cried: ‘Hold! hold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What are you doing, madman?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spurn you more wealth than can be told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fowl that lays the eggs of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because she’s plainly clad, man?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him Philemon: ‘I’ll not balk</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy will with any shackle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt add a harden to thy walk?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There! take her without further talk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You’re both but fit to cackle!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But scarce the poet touched the bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It swelled to stature regal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when her cloud-wide wings she stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A whisper as of doom was heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas Jove’s bolt-bearing eagle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when from far-off cloud-bergs springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A crag, and, hurtling under,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cliff to cliff the rumor flings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So she from flight-foreboding wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shook out a murmurous thunder.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She gripped the poet to her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever, upward soaring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth seemed a new moon in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then one light among the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where squadrons lie at mooring.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How tell to what heaven-hallowed seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eagle bent his courses?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves that on its bases beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gales that round it weave and fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are life’s creative forces.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here was the bird’s primeval nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">High on a promontory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Star-pharosed, where she takes her rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To brood new æons ’neath her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The future’s unfledged glory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know not how, but I was there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All feeling, hearing, seeing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not wind that stirred my hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But living breath, the essence rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of unembodied being.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in the nest an egg of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay soft in self-made lustre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing whereon, what depths untold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within, what marvels manifold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed silently to muster!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Daily such splendors to confront</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is still to me and you sent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It glowed as when Saint Peter’s front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illumed, forgets its stony wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seems to throb translucent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One saw therein the life of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Or so the poet found it,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yolk and white, conceive who can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the glad earth, that, floating, span</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the glad heaven around it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I knew this as one knows in dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where no effects to causes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are chained as in our work-day scheme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then was wakened by a scream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That seemed to come from Baucis.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Bless Zeus!’ she cried, ‘I’m safe below!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First pale, then red as coral;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, still drowsy, pondered slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seemed to find, but hardly know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Something like this for moral.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each day the world is born anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him who takes it rightly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not fresher that which Adam knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not sweeter that whose moonlit dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entranced Arcadia nightly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rightly? That’s simply: ’tis to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"> <i>Some</i> substance casts these shadows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which we call Life and History,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That aimless seem to chase and flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like wind-gleams over meadows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Simply? That’s nobly: ’tis to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That God may still be met with,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor groweth old, nor doth bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These senses fine, this brain aglow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grovel and forget with.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beauty, Herr Doctor, trust in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No chemistry will win you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charis still rises from the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you can’t find her, <i>might</i> it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because you seek within you?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-familiar-epistle-to-a-friend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Familiar Epistle to a Friend</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Alike I hate to be your debtor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or write a mere perfunctory letter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For letters, so it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our careless quintessence should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our real nature’s truant play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Consciousness looks t’other way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not drop by drop, with watchful skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered in Art’s deliberate still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But life’s insensible completeness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Got as the ripe grape gets its sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if it had a way to fuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden sunlight into juice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopeless my mental pump I try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boxes hiss, the tube is dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those petroleum wells that spout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awhile like M.C.’s, then give out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spring, once full as Arethusa,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a mere bore as dry’s Creusa;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet you ask me why I’m glum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And why my graver Muse is dumb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah me! I’ve reasons manifold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condensed in one⁠—I’m getting old!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When life, once past its fortieth year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheels up its evening hemisphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind’s own shadow, which the boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw onward point to hope and joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shifts round, irrevocably set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tow’rd morning’s loss and vain regret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, argue with it as we will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clock is unconverted still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘But count the gains,’ I hear you say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Which far the seeming loss out-weigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friendships built firm ’gainst flood and wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On rock foundations of the mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowledge instead of scheming hope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wild adventure, settled scope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talents, from surface-ore profuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tempered and edged to tools for use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Judgment, for passion’s headlong whirls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old sorrows crystalled into pearls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Losses by patience turned to gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possessions now, that once were pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy’s blossom gone, as go it must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ripen seeds of faith and trust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why heed a snow-flake on the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If fire within keep Age aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though blundering north-winds push and strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With palms benumbed against the pane?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My dear old Friend, you’re very wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We always are with others’ eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see <i>so</i> clear! (our neighbor’s deck on)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What reef the idiot’s sure to wreck on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folks when they learn how life has quizzed ’em</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fain to make a shift with Wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, finding she nor breaks nor bends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give her a letter to their friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw passion’s torrent whoso will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through sluices smooth to turn a mill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, taking solid toll of grist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget the rainbow in the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The exulting leap, the aimless haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered in iridescent waste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prefer who likes the sure esteem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cheated youth’s midsummer dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When every friend was more than Damon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each quicksand safe to build a fame on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe that prudence snug excels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth’s gross of verdant spectacles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which earth’s withered stubble seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks autumn-proof as painted green⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I side with Moses ’gainst the masses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take you the drudge, give me the glasses!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for your talents shaped with practice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convince me first that such the fact is;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let whoso likes be beat, poor fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On life’s hard stithy to a tool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be whoso will a ploughshare made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me remain a jolly blade!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What’s Knowledge, with her stocks and lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gay Conjecture’s yellow strands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s watching her slow flock’s increase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ventures for the golden fleece?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What her deep ships, safe under lee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To youth’s light craft, that drinks the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Flying Islands making sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And failing where ’tis gain to fail?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah me! Experience (so we’re told),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time’s crucible, turns lead to gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet what’s experience won but dross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloud-gold transmuted to our loss?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What but base coin the best event</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the untried experiment!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas an old couple, says the poet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lodged the gods and did not know it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth sees and knows them as they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Olympus’ top was bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Swampscot’s flats his eye divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees Venus rocking on the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lucent limbs, that somehow scatter a</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charm that turns Doll to Cleopatra;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bacchus (that now is scarce induced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give Eld’s lagging blood a boost),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cymbals’ clang and pards to draw him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divine as Ariadne saw him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storms through Youth’s pulse with all his train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wins new Indies in his brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo (with the old a trope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sort of finer Mister Pope),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo⁠—but the Muse forbids:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his approach cast down thy lids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think it joy enough to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off his arrows singing clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows enough who silent knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiver chiming as he goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tells too much who e’er betrays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining Archer’s secret ways.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dear Friend, you’re right and I am wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My quibbles are not worth a song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I sophistically tease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fancy sad to tricks like these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not cheat you if I would;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know me and my jesting mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere surface-foam, for pride concealing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purpose of my deeper feeling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have not spilt one drop of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured in the senses of the boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Nature fails my walks to bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all her golden inwardness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as blind nestlings, unafraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch up wide-mouthed to every shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which their downy dream is stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking it for the mother-bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, when God’s shadow, which is light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unheralded, by day or night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wakening instincts falls across,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent as sunbeams over moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my heart’s nest half-conscious things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir with a helpless sense of wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lift themselves up, and tremble long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With premonitions sweet of song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be patient, and perhaps (who knows?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These may be winged one day like those;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thrushes, close-embowered to sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced through with June’s delicious sting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If swallows, their half-hour to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Star-breasted in the setting sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first they’re but the unfledged proem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or songless schedule of a poem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from the shell they’re hardly dry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If some folks thrust them forth, must I?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But let me end with a comparison</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never yet hit upon by e’er a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our American Apollo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(And there’s where I shall beat them hollow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he indeed’s no courtly St. John,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as West said, a Mohawk Injun.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poem’s like a cruise for whales:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through untried seas the hunter sails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His prow dividing waters known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blue iceberg’s hulk alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last, on farthest edge of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He marks the smoky puff of spray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with bent oars the shallop flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the basking quarry lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the excitement of the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crimsoned waves⁠—ah, this is life!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, the dead plunder once secured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And safe beside the vessel moored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that had stirred the blood before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is so much blubber, nothing more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I mean no pun, nor image so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere sentimental verse, you know,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all is tedium, smoke, and soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In trying out the noisome oil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, this <i>is</i> life! And so the bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through briny deserts, never scarred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Noah’s keel, a subject seeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lies upon the watch for weeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That once harpooned and helpless lying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What follows is but weary trying.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now I’ve a notion, if a poet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat up for themes, his verse will show it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wait for subjects that hunt me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By day or night won’t let me be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hang about me like a curse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they have made me into verse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From line to line my fingers tease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond my knowledge, as the bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build no new cell till those before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With limpid summer-sweet run o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, if I neither sing nor shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it the subject’s fault, or mine?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-ember-picture" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Ember Picture</h2>
			<p>
				<span>How strange are the freaks of memory!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lessons of life we forget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While a trifle, a trick of color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the wonderful web is set⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Set by some mordant of fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, spite of the wear and tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of time or distance or trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Insists on its right to be there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A chance had brought us together;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our talk was of matters-of-course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were nothing, one to the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But a short half-hour’s resource.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We spoke of French acting and actors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their easy, natural way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the weather, for it was raining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As we drove home from the play.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We debated the social nothings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We bore ourselves so to discuss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunderous rumors of battle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were silent the while for us.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Arrived at her door, we left her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a drippingly hurried adieu,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our wheels went crunching the gravel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the oak-darkened avenue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As we drove away through the shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The candle she held in the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From rain-varnished tree-trunk to tree-trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flashed fainter, and flashed no more;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Flashed fainter, then wholly faded</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before we had passed the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the light of the face behind it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went with me and stayed for good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The vision of scarce a moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hardly marked at the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It comes unbidden to haunt me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a scrap of ballad-rhyme.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had she beauty? Well, not what they call so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You may find a thousand as fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet there’s her face in my memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With no special claim to be there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As I sit sometimes in the twilight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And call back to life in the coals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old faces and hopes and fancies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long buried, (good rest to their souls!)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her face shines out in the embers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see her holding the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear the crunch of the gravel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the sweep of the rain that night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis a face that can never grow older,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That never can part with its gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a gracious possession forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For is it not all a dream?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-h-w-l" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To H. W. L.</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On His Birthday, 27th February, 1867</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I need not praise the sweetness of his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where limpid verse to limpid verse succeeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth as our Charles, when, fearing lest he wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The new moon’s mirrored skiff, he slides along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full without noise, and whispers in his reeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With loving breath of all the winds his name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is blown about the world, but to his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sweeter secret hides behind his fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Love steals shyly through the loud acclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To murmur a <i>God bless you!</i> and there ends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As I muse backward up the checkered years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein so much was given, so much was lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessings in both kinds, such as cheapen tears⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hush! this is not for profaner ears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let them drink molten pearls nor dream the cost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some suck up poison from a sorrow’s core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As naught but nightshade grew upon earth’s ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love turned all his to heart’s-ease, and the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fate tried his bastions, she but forced a door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leading to sweeter manhood and more sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even as a wind-waved fountain’s swaying shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems of mixed race, a gray wraith shot with sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So through his trial faith translucent rayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till darkness, halt disnatured so, betrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heart of sunshine that would fain o’errun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Surely if skill in song the shears may stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of its purpose cheat the charmed abyss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If our poor life be lengthened by a lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall not go, although his presence may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the next age in praise shall double this.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long days be his, and each as lusty-sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As gracious natures find his song to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May Age steal on with softly-cadenced feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling in music, as for him were meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose choicest verse is harsher-toned than he!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-nightingale-in-the-study" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Nightingale in the Study</h2>
			<p>
				<span>‘Come forth!’ my catbird calls to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘And hear me sing a cavatina</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, in this old familiar tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall hang a garden of Alcina.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘These buttercups shall brim with wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond all Lesbian juice or Massic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not New England be divine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My ode to ripening summer classic?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Or, if to me you will not hark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Beaver Brook a thrush is ringing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all the alder-coverts dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seem sunshine-dappled with his singing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Come out beneath the unmastered sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its emancipating spaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn to sing as well as I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without premeditated graces.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘What boot your many-volumed gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those withered leaves forever turning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win, at best, for all your pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A nature mummy-wrapt to learning?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘The leaves wherein true wisdom lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On living trees the sun are drinking;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those white clouds, drowsing through the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grew not so beautiful by thinking.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘ “Come out!” with me the oriole cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Escape the demon that pursues you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, hark, the cuckoo weather-wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still hiding farther onward, wooes you.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Alas, dear friend, that, all my days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hast poured from that syringa thicket</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quaintly discontinuous lays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which I hold a season-ticket.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘A season-ticket cheaply bought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a dessert of pilfered berries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who so oft my soul hast caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With morn and evening voluntaries,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Deem me not faithless, if all day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among my dusty books I linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No pipe, like thee, for June to play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fancy-led, half-conscious finger.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘A bird is singing in my brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bubbling o’er with mingled fancies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay, tragic, rapt, right heart of Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fed with the sap of old romances.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘I ask no ampler skies than those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His magic music rears above me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No falser friends, no truer foes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And does not Doña Clara love me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Cloaked shapes, a twanging of guitars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rush of feet, and rapiers clashing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then silence deep with breathless stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And overhead a white hand flashing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘O music of all moods and climes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vengeful, forgiving, sensuous, saintly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where still, between the Christian chimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish cymbal tinkles faintly!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘O life borne lightly in the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For friend or foe with grace Castilian!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O valley safe in Fancy’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not tramped to mud yet by the million!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Bird of to-day, thy songs are stale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his, my singer of all weathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Calderon, my nightingale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My Arab soul in Spanish feathers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Ah, friend, these singers dead so long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still, God knows, in purgatory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give its best sweetness to all song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Nature’s self her better glory.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-the-twilight" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In the Twilight</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Men say the sullen instrument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, from the Master’s bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pangs of joy or woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feels music’s soul through every fibre sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whispers the ravished strings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than he knew or meant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old summers in its memory glow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The secrets of the wind it sings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It hears the April-loosened springs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And mixes with its mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All it dreamed when it stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the murmurous pine-wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Long ago!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The magical moonlight then</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Steeped every bough and cone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roar of the brook in the glen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came dim from the distance blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind through its glooms sang low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it swayed to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With delight as it stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the wonderful wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Long ago!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O my life, have we not had seasons</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That only said, Live and rejoice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That asked not for causes and reasons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But made us all feeling and voice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we went with the winds in their blowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Nature and we were peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we seemed to share in the flowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the inexhaustible years?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have we not from the earth drawn juices</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too fine for earth’s sordid uses?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Have I heard, have I seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All I feel, all I know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Doth my heart overween?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or could it have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Long ago?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes a breath floats by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An odor from Dreamland sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes the ghost seem nigh me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a splendor that came and went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a life lived somewhere, I know not</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In what diviner sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of memories that stay not and go not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like music heard once by an ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That cannot forget or reclaim it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A something so shy, it would shame it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make it a show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A something too vague, could I name it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For others to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I had lived it or dreamed it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I had acted or schemed it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Long ago!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, could I live it over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This life that stirs in my brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I be both maiden and lover.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moon and tide, bee and clover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I seem to have been, once again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I but speak it and show it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This pleasure more sharp than pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That baffles and lures me so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world should once more have a poet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Such as it had</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In the ages glad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Long ago!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-foot-path" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Foot-Path</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It mounts athwart the windy hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through sallow slopes of upland bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Fancy climbs with foot-fall still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its narrowing curves that end in air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By day, a warmer-hearted blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stoops softly to that topmost swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its thread-like windings seem a clue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gracious climes where all is well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By night, far yonder, I surmise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An ampler world than clips my ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the great stars of happier skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Commingle nobler fates of men.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I look and long, then haste me home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still master of my secret rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once tried, the path would end in Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now it leads me everywhere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forever to the new it guides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From former good, old overmuch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Nature for her poets hides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis wiser to divine than clutch.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bird I list hath never come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the scope of mortal ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My prying step would make him dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the fair tree, his shelter, sear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Behind the hill, behind the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind my inmost thought, he sings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No feet avail; to hear it nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The song itself must lend the wings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sing on, sweet bird close hid, and raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those angel stairways in my brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That climb from these low-vaulted days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To spacious sunshines far from pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sing when thou wilt, enchantment fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I leave thy covert haunt untrod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And envy Science not her feat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make a twice-told tale of God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They said the fairies tript no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And long ago that Pan was dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas but that fools preferred to bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth’s rind inch-deep for truth instead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pan leaps and pipes all summer long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fairies dance each full-mooned night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would we but doff our lenses strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And trust our wiser eyes’ delight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>City of Elf-land, just without</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our seeing, marvel ever new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glimpsed in fair weather, a sweet doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sketched-in, mirage-like, on the blue,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I build thee in yon sunset cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose edge allures to climb the height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear thy drowned bells, inly-loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From still pools dusk with dreams of night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy gates are shut to hardiest will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy countersign of long-lost speech⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those fountained courts, those chambers still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fronting Time’s far East, who shall reach?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know not, and will never pry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But trust our human heart for all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonders that from the seeker fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into an open sense may fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hide in thine own soul, and surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The password of the unwary elves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek it, thou canst not bribe their spies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsought, they whisper it themselves.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-washers-of-the-shroud" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Washers of the Shroud</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">October, 1861</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Along a river-side, I know not where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I walked one night in mystery of dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chill creeps curdling yet beneath my hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think what chanced me by the pallid gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a moon-wraith that waned through haunted air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pale fireflies pulsed within the meadow-mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hales, wavering thistledowns of light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loon, that seemed to mock some goblin tryst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughed; and the echoes, huddling in affright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Odin’s hounds, fled baying down the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then all was silent, till there smote my ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A movement in the stream that checked my breath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it the slow plash of a wading deer?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But something said, ‘This water is of Death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sisters wash a shroud⁠—ill thing to hear!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I, looking then, beheld the ancient Three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Known to the Greek’s and to the Northman’s creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sit in shadow of the mystic Tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still crooning, as they weave their endless brede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One song: ‘Time was, Time is, and Time shall be.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No wrinkled crones were they, as I had deemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fair as yesterday, to-day, to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mourner, lover, poet, ever seemed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something too high for joy, too deep for sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled in their tones, and from their faces gleamed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Still men and nations reap as they have strawn,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sang they, working at their task the while;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The fatal raiment must be cleansed ere dawn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Austria? Italy? the Sea-Queen’s isle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er what quenched grandeur must our shroud be drawn?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Or is it for a younger, fairer corse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gathered States like children round his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tamed the wave to be his posting-horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feller of forests, linker of the seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bridge-builder, hammerer, youngest son of Thor’s?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘What make we, murmur’st thou? and what are we?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When empires must be wound, we bring the shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time-old web of the implacable Three:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it too coarse for him, the young and proud?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s mightiest deigned to wear it⁠—why not he?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Is there no hope?’ I moaned, ‘so strong, so fair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Fowler whose proud bird would brook erewhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rival’s swoop in all our western air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather the ravens, then, in funeral file</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, life’s morn yet golden in his hair?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Leave me not hopeless, ye unpitying dames!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see, half seeing. Tell me, ye who scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars, Earth’s elders, still must noblest aims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be traced upon oblivious ocean-sands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must Hesper join the wailing ghosts of names?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘When grass-blades stiffen with red battle-dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye deem we choose the victor and the slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, choose we them that shall be leal and true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heart’s longing, the high faith of brain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet there the victory lies, if ye but knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Three roots bear up Dominion: Knowledge, Will⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These twain are strong, but stronger yet the third⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obedience⁠—’tis the great tap-root that still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knit round the rock of Duty, is not stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Heaven-loosed tempests spend their utmost skill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Is the doom sealed for Hesper? ’Tis not we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denounce it, but the Law before all time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave makes danger opportunity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waverer, paltering with the chance sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwarfs it to peril: which shall Hesper be?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Hath he let vultures climb his eagle’s seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make Jove’s bolts purveyors of their maw?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath he the Many’s plaudits found more sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Wisdom? held Opinion’s wind for Law?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let him hearken for the doomster’s feet!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Rough are the steps, slow-hewn in flintiest rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>States climb to power by; slippery those with gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down which they stumble to eternal mock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No chafferer’s hand shall long the sceptre hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, given a Fate to shape, would sell the block.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘We sing old Sagas, songs of weal and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mystic because too cheaply understood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark sayings are not ours; men hear and know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See Evil weak, see strength alone in Good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet hope to stem God’s fire with walls of tow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Time Was unlocks the riddle of Time Is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That offers choice of glory or of gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solver makes Time Shall Be surely his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hasten, Sisters! for even now the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grates its slow hinge and calls from the abyss.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘But not for him,’ I cried, ‘not yet for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose large horizon, westering, star by star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wins from the void to where on Ocean’s rim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunset shuts the world with golden bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet his thews shall fail, his eye grow dim!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘His shall be larger manhood, saved for those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That walk unblenching through the trial-fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not suffering, but faint heart, is worst of woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he no base-born son of craven sires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose eye need blench confronted with his foes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Tears may be ours, but proud, for those who win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death’s royal purple in the foe-man’s lines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace, too, brings tears; and mid the battle-din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wiser ear some text of God divines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sheathed blade may rust with darker sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘God, give us peace! not such as lulls to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sword on thigh, and brow with purpose knit!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let our Ship of State to harbor sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her ports all up, her battle-lanterns lit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her leashed thunders gathering for their leap!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So cried I with clenched hands and passionate pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking of dear ones by Potomac’s side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the loon laughed mocking, and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The echoes bayed far down the night and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While waking I recalled my wandering brain.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="two-scenes-from-the-life-of-blondel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Two Scenes from the Life of Blondel</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Autumn, 1863</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">
						<i>Near a castle in Germany.</i>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twere no hard task, perchance, to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The popular laurel for my song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere only to comply with sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And own the crown, though snatched by wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather Truth’s chaplet let me wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though sharp as death its thorns may sting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loyal to Loyalty, I bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No badge but of my rightful king.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Patient by town and tower I wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or o’er the blustering moorland go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I buy no praise at cheaper rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what faint hearts may fancy so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, no joy in lady’s bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hall, or tourney, will I sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the slow stars wheel round the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That crowns my hero and my king.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While all the land runs red with strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wealth is won by pedler-crimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let who will find content in life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tinkle in unmanly rhymes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wait and seek; through dark and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Safe in my heart my hope I bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I once more my faith may plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him my whole soul owns her king.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When power is filched by drone and dolt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, with canght breath and flashing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her knuckles whitening round the bolt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vengeance leans eager from the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While this and that the people guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the skirts of praters cling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who court the crowd they should compress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I turn in scorn to seek my king.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shut in what tower of darkling chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or dungeon of a narrow doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream’st thou of battle-axe and lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the Cross make crashing room?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come! with hushed breath the battle waits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wild van thy mace’s swing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While doubters parley with their fates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make thou thine own and ours, my king!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O strong to keep upright the old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wise to buttress with the new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prudent, as only are the bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clear-eyed, as only are the true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To foes benign, to friendship stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Intent to imp Law’s broken wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would not die, if death might earn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The right to kiss thy hand, my king?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">
						<i>An Inn near the Château of Chalus.</i>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well, the whole thing is over, and here I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With one arm in a sling and a milk-score of gashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this flagon of Cyprus must e’en warm my wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since what’s left of youth’s flame is a head flecked with ashes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I remember I sat in this very same inn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was young then, and one young man thought I was handsome⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had found out what prison King Richard was in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was spurring for England to push on the ransom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How I scorned the dull souls that sat guzzling around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew not my secret nor recked my derision!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the world sink or swim, John or Richard be crowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All one, so the beer-tax got lenient revision.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How little I dreamed, as I tramped up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That granting our wish one of Fate’s saddest Jokes is!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had mine with a vengeance⁠—my king got his crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made his whole business to break other folks’s.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I might as well join in the safe old <i>tum, tum</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hero’s an excellent loadstar⁠—but, bless ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What infinite odds ’twixt a hero to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your only too palpable hero <i>in esse!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precisely the odds (such examples are rife)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt the poem conceived and the rhyme we make show of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt the boy’s morning dream and the wake-up of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt the Blondel God meant and a Blondel I know of!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the world’s better off, I’m convinced of it now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than if heroes, like buns, could be bought for a penny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To regard all mankind as their haltered milch-cow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And just care for themselves. Well, God cares for the many;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For somehow the poor old Earth blunders along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each son of hers adding his mite of unfitness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, choosing the sure way of coming out wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gets to port as the next generation will witness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You think her old ribs have come all crashing through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If a whisk of Fate’s broom snap your cobweb asunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her rivets were clinched by a wiser than you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And our sins cannot push the Lord’s right hand from under.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better one honest man who can wait for God’s mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In our poor shifting scene here though heroes were plenty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better one bite, at forty, of Truth’s bitter rind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the hot wine that gushed from the vintage of twenty!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I see it all now: when I wanted a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas the kingship that failed in myself I was seeking⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis so much less easy to do than to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much simpler to reign by a proxy than <i>be</i> king!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, I think I <i>do</i> see; after all’s said and sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take this one rule of life and you never will rue it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but do your own duty and hold your own tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Blondel were royal himself, if he knew it!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="memoriae-positum" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Memoriae Positum</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">R. G. Shaw</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Beneath the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My lifelong friends in this dear spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad now for eyes that see them not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I hear the autumnal breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wake the dry leaves to sigh for gladness gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering vague omens of oblivion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hear, restless as the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s grim feet rustling through the withered grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a spreading realm and strong-stemmed race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Even as my own through these.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Why make we moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loss that doth enrich us yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With upward yearning of regret?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bleaker than unmossed stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our lives were but for this immortal gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of unstilled longing and inspiring pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As thrills of long-hushed tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live in the viol, so our souls grow fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With keen vibrations from the touch divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of noble natures gone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">’Twere indiscreet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To vex the shy and sacred grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With harsh obtrusions of relief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet, Verse, with noiseless feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go whisper: ‘<i>This</i> death hath far choicer ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than slowly to impearl to hearts of friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These obsequies ’tis meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to seclude in closets of the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, church-like, with wide doorways, to impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Even to the heedless street.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Brave, good, and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I see him stand before me now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read again on that young brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where every hope was new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>How sweet were life!</i> Yet, by the mouth firm-set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look made up for Duty’s utmost debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I could divine he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That death within the sulphurous hostile lines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the mere wreck of nobly pitched designs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Plucks heart’s-ease, and not rue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Happy their end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who vanish down life’s evening stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Placid as swans that drift in dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Round the next river-bend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy long life, with honor at the close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends’ painless tears, the softened thought of foes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And yet, like him, to spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All at a gush, keeping our first faith sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From mid-life’s doubt and eld’s contentment poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What more could Fortune send?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Right in the van,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the red rampart’s slippery swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heart that beat a charge, he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Foeward, as fits a man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the high soul burns on to light men’s feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where death for noble ends makes dying sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His life her crescent’s span</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orbs full with share in their undarkening days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who ever climbed the battailous steeps of praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Since valor’s praise began.</span>
				</p>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">His life’s expense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath won him coeternal youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the immaculate prime of Truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While we, who make pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At living on, and wake and eat and sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life’s stale trick by repetition keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our fickle permanence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A poor leaf-shadow on a brook, whose play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of busy idlesse ceases with our day)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is the mere cheat of sense.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">We bide our chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unhappy, and make terms with Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little more to let us wait;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He leads for aye the advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope’s forlorn-hopes that plant the desperate good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nobler Earths and days of manlier mood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our wall of circumstance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleared at a bound, he flashes o’er the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A saintly shape of fame, to cheer the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And steel each wavering glance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">I write of one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While with dim eyes I think of three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who weeps not others fair and brave as he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ah, when the fight is won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Land, whom triflers now make bold to scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Thee! from whose forehead Earth awaits her morn,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How nobler shall the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flame in thy sky, how braver breathe thy air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou bred’st children who for thee could dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And die as thine have done!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="on-board-the-76" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title">On Board the ’76</h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Written for Mr. Bryant’s Seventieth Birthday</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">November 3, 1884</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Our ship lay tumbling in an angry sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her rudder gone, her mainmast o’er the side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her scuppers, from the waves’ clutch staggering free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trailed threads of priceless crimson through the tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sails, shrouds, and spars with pirate cannon torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We lay, awaiting morn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Awaiting morn, such morn as mocks despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she that bare the promise of the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within her sides, now hopeless, helmless, bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At random o’er the wildering waters hurled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reek of battle drifting slow alee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not sullener than we.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Morn came at last to peer into our woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo, a sail! Mow surely help was nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red cross flames aloft, Christ’s pledge; but no,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her black guns grinning hate, she rushes by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hails us:⁠—‘Gains the leak! Ay, so we thought!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sink, then, with curses fraught!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I leaned against my gun still angry-hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my lids tingled with the tears held back:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This scorn methought was crueller than shot:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The manly death-grip in the battle-wrack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yard-arm to yard-arm, were more friendly far</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than such fear-smothered war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There our foe wallowed, like a wounded brute</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fiercer for his hurt. What now were best?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more tug bravely at the peril’s root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though death came with it? Or evade the test</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If right or wrong in this God’s world of ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be leagued with mightier powers?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some, faintly loyal, felt their pulses lag</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the slow beat that doubts and then despairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some, caitiff, would have struck the starry flag</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That knits us with our past, and makes us heirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of deeds high-hearted as were ever done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Neath the all-seeing sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But there was one, the Singer of our crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon whose head Age waved his peaceful sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whose red heart’s-blood no surrender knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And couchant under brows of massive line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes, like guns beneath a parapet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watched, charged with lightnings yet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The voices of the hills did his obey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The torrents flashed and tumbled in his song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brought our native fields from far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or set us ‘mid the innumerable throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dateless woods, or where we heard the calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old homestead’s evening psalm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now he sang of faith to things unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of freedom’s birthright given to us in trust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And words of doughty cheer he spoke between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That made all earthly fortune seem as dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matched with that duty, old as Time and new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of being brave and true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We, listening, learned what makes the might of words⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Manhood to back them, constant as a star:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice rammed home our cannon, edged our swords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sent our boarders shouting; shroud and spar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard him and stiffened; the sails heard, and wooed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winds with loftier mood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In our dark hours he manned our guns again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remanned ourselves from his own manhood’s stores;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride, honor, country, throbbed through all his strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall we praise? God’s praise was his before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on our futile laurels he looks down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself our bravest crown.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-recited-at-the-harvard-commemoration" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Ode Recited at the Harvard Commemoration</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">July 21, 1865</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Weak-winged is song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor aims at that clear-ethered height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither the brave deed climbs for light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We seem to do them wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bringing our robin’s-leaf to deck their hearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in warm life-blood wrote their nobler verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our trivial song to honor those who come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ears attuned to strenuous trump and drum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shaped in squadron-strophes their desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live battle-odes whose lines were steel and fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet sometimes feathered words are strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gracious memory to buoy up and save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Lethe’s dreamless ooze, the common grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the unventurous throng.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To-day our Reverend Mother welcomes back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wisest Scholars, those who understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deeper teaching of her mystic tome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offered their fresh lives to make it good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">No lore of Greece or Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No science peddling with the names of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or reading stars to find inglorious fates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Can lift our life with wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from Death’s idle gulf that for the many waits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And lengthen out our dates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that clear fame whose memory sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In manly hearts to come, and nerves them and dilates:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor such thy teaching, Mother of us all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Not such the trumpet-call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of thy diviner mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">That could thy sons entice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From happy homes and toils, the fruitful nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those half-virtues which the world calls best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Into War’s tumult rude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">But rather far that stern device</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sponsors chose that round thy cradle stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the dim, unventured wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The <b>veritas</b> that lurks beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The letter’s unprolific sheath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life of whate’er makes life worth living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seed-grain of high emprise, immortal food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One heavenly thing whereof earth hath the giving.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Many loved Truth, and lavished life’s best oil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the dust of books to find her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content at last, for guerdon of their toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the cast mantle she hath left behind her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Many in sad faith sought for her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Many with crossed hands sighed for her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But these, our brothers, fought for her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">At life’s dear peril wrought for her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So loved her that they died for her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tasting the raptured fleetness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of her divine completeness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their higher instinct knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those love her best who to themselves are true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what they dare to dream of, dare to do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They followed her and found her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where all may hope to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in the ashes of the burnt-out mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But beautiful, with danger’s sweetness round her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where faith made whole with deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Breathes its awakening breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Into the lifeless creed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They saw her plumed and mailed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With sweet, stern face unveiled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all-repaying eyes, look proud on them in death.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our slender life runs rippling by, and glides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the silent hollow of the past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What is there that abides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the next age better for the last?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is earth too poor to give us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something to live for here that shall outlive us?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Some more substantial boon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than such as flows and ebbs with Fortune’s fickle moon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The little that we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From doubt is never free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The little that we do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is but half-nobly true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With our laborious hiving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What men call treasure, and the gods call dross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life seems a fest of Fate’s contriving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only secure in every one’s conniving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A long account of nothings paid with loss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where we poor puppets, jerked by unseen wires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After our little hour of strut and rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all our pasteboard passions and desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves, hates, ambitions, and immortal fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are tossed pell-mell together in the grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stay! no age was e’er degenerate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless men held it at too cheap a rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in our likeness still we shape our fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ah, there is something here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfathomed by the cynic’s sneer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something that gives our feeble light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A high immunity from Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something that leaps life’s narrow bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To claim its birthright with the hosts of heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seed of sunshine that can leaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our earthly dullness with the beams of stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And glorify our clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With light from fountains elder than the Day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A conscience more divine than we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A gladness fed with secret tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A vexing, forward-reaching sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of some more noble permanence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">A light across the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which haunts the soul and will not let it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still beaconing from the heights of undegenerate years.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Whither leads the path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To ampler fates that leads?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Not down through flowery meads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To reap an aftermath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of youth’s vainglorious weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But up the steep, amid the wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shock of deadly-hostile creeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the world’s best hope and stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By battle’s flashes gropes a desperate way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every turf the fierce foot clings to bleeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace hath her not ignoble wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere yet the sharp, decisive word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light the black lips of cannon, and the sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dreams in its easeful sheath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But some day the live coal behind the thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whether from Baäl’s stone obscene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or from the shrine serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of God’s pure altar brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursts up in flame; the war of tongue and pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learns with what deadly purpose it was fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, helpless in the fiery passion caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shakes all the pillared state with shock of men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some day the soft Ideal that we wooed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confronts us fiercely, foe-beset, pursued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cries reproachful: ‘Was it, then, my praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not myself was loved? Prove now thy truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I claim of thee the promise of thy youth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me thy life, or cower in empty phrase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victim of thy genius, not its mate!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life may be given in many ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loyalty to Truth be sealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bravely in the closet as the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So bountiful is Fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But then to stand beside her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When craven churls deride her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To front a lie in arms and not to yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This shows, methinks, God’s plan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And measure of a stalwart man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Limbed like the old heroic breeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who stands self-poised on manhood’s solid earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not forced to frame excuses for his birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fed from within with all the strength he needs.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such was he, our Martyr-Chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whom late the Nation he had led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With ashes on her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wept with the passion of an angry grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive me, if from present things I turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak what in my heart will beat and burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hang my wreath on his world-honored urn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nature, they say, doth dote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And cannot make a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Save on some worn-out plan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Repeating as by rote:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him her Old-World moulds aside she threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, choosing sweet clay from the breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the unexhausted West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stuff untainted shaped a hero new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise, steadfast in the strength of God, and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How beautiful to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more a shepherd of mankind indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loved his charge, but never loved to lead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One whose meek flock the people joyed to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Not lured by any cheat of birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But by his clear-grained human worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brave old wisdom of sincerity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They knew that outward grace is dust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They could not choose but trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that sure-footed mind’s unfaltering skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And supple-tempered will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bent like perfect steel to spring again and thrust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His was no lonely mountain-peak of mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thrusting to thin air o’er our cloudy bars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A sea-mark now, now lost in vapors blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Broad prairie rather, genial, level-lined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fruitful and friendly for all human kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet also nigh to heaven and loved of loftiest stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Nothing of Europe here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, then, of Europe fronting mornward still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ere any names of Serf and Peer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Could Nature’s equal scheme deface</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And thwart her genial will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here was a type of the true elder race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of Plutarch’s men talked with us face to face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I praise him not; it were too late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some innative weakness there must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In him who condescends to victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the Present gives, and cannot wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Safe in himself as in a fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">So always firmly he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">He knew to bide his time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And can his fame abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still patient in his simple faith sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Till the wise years decide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great captains, with their guns and drums,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Disturb our judgment for the hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But at last silence comes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These all are gone, and, standing like a tower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our children shall behold his fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The kindly-earnest, brave, foreseeing man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sagacious, patient, dreading praise, not blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New birth of our new soil, the first American.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Long as man’s hope insatiate can discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or only guess some more inspiring goal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Outside of Self, enduring as the pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along whose course the flying axles burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of spirits bravely pitched, earth’s manlier brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Long as below we cannot find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The meed that stills the inexorable mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long this faith to some ideal Good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under whatever mortal names it masks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Freedom, Law, Country, this ethereal mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thanks the Fates for their severer tasks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feeling its challenged pulses leap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While others skulk in subterfuges cheap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, set in Danger’s van, has all the boon it asks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall win man’s praise and woman’s love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall be a wisdom that we set above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other skills and gifts to culture dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A virtue round whose forehead we inwreathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laurels that with a living passion breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When other crowns grow, while we twine them, sear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What brings us thronging these high rites to pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seal these hours the noblest of our year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that our brothers found this better way?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">We sit here in the Promised Land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That flows with Freedom’s honey and milk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ’twas they won it, sword in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making the nettle danger soft for us as silk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We welcome back our bravest and our best;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah me! not all! some come not with the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who went forth brave and bright as any here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I strive to mix some gladness with my strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">But the sad strings complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And will not please the ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sweep them for a pæan, but they wane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Again and yet again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a dirge, and die away, in pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In these brave ranks I only see the gaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking of dear ones whom the dumb turf wraps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark to the triumph which they died to gain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fitlier may others greet the living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For me the past is unforgiving;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">I with uncovered head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Salute the sacred dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who went, and who return not.⁠—Say not so!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not the grapes of Canaan that repay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the high faith that failed not by the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue treads paths that end not in the grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No ban of endless night exiles the brave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And to the saner mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We rather seem the dead that stayed behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blow, trumpets, all your exultations blow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never shall their aureoled presence lack:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see them muster in a gleaming row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ever-youthful brows that nobler show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We find in our dull road their shining track;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In every nobler mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We feel the orient of their spirit glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part of our life’s unalterable good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all our saintlier aspiration;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They come transfigured back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secure from change in their high-hearted ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful evermore, and with the rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of morn on their white Shields of Expectation!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">But is there hope to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even this ethereal essence from the grave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ever ‘scaped Oblivion’s subtle wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save a few clarion names, or golden threads of song?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Before my musing eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The mighty ones of old sweep by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disvoicèd now and insubstantial things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As noisy once as we; poor ghosts of kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shadows of empire wholly gone to dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many races, nameless long ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To darkness driven by that imperious gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ever-rushing Time that here doth blow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O visionary world, condition strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where naught abiding is but only Change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the deep-bolted stars themselves still shift and range!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall we to more continuance make pretence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renown builds tombs, a life-estate is Wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And, bit by bit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cunning years steal all from us but woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaves are we, whose decays no harvest sow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But, when we vanish hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall they lie forceless in the dark below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save to make green their little length of souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or deepen pansies for a year or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now to us are shining-sweet as gods?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was dying all they had the skill to do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were not fruitless: but the Soul resents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such short-lived service, as if blind events</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruled without her, or earth could so endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She claims a more divine investiture</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of longer tenure than Fame’s airy rents;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er she touches doth her nature share;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her inspiration haunts the ennobled air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Gives eyes to mountains blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ears to the deaf earth, voices to the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her clear trump slugs succor everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By lonely bivouacs to the wakeful mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For soul inherits all that soul could dare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Yea, Manhood hath a wider span</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And larger privilege of life than man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The single deed, the private sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So radiant now through proudly-hidden tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is covered up erelong from mortal eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thoughtless drift of the deciduous years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that high privilege that makes all men peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That leap of heart whereby a people rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Up to a noble anger’s height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, flamed on by the Fates, not shrink, but grow more bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That swift validity in noble veins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of choosing danger and disdaining shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of being set on flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By the pure fire that flies all contact base</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wraps its chosen with angelic might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">These are imperishable gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sure as the sun, medicinal as light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These hold great futures in their lusty reins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certify to earth a new imperial race.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Who now shall sneer?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who dare again to say we trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our lines to a plebeian race?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Roundhead and Cavalier!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dumb are those names erewhile in battle loud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream-footed as the shadow of a cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They flit across the ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is best blood that hath most iron in ‘t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To edge resolve with, pouring without stint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For what makes manhood dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tell us not of Plantagenets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hapsburgs, and Guelfs, whose thin bloods crawl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from some victor in a border-brawl!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How poor their outworn coronets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Matched with one leaf of that plain civic wreath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our brave for honor’s blazon shall bequeath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through whose desert a rescued Nation sets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heel on treason, and the trumpet hears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shout victory, tingling Europe’s sullen ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vain resentments and more vain regrets!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Not in anger, not in pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pure from passion’s mixture rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ever to base earth allied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But with far-heard gratitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Still with heart and voice renewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heroes living and dear martyrs dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strain should close that consecrates our brave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift the heart and lift the head!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lofty be its mood and grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Not without a martial ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Not without a prouder tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And a peal of exultation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Little right has he to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Through whose heart in such an hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beats no march of conscious power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweeps no tumult of elation!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Tis no Man we celebrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By his country’s victories great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hero half, and half the whim of Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But the pith and marrow of a Nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Drawing force from all her men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Highest, humblest, weakest, all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For her time of need, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pulsing it again through them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the basest can no longer cower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feeling his soul spring up divinely tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touched but in passing by her mantle-hem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come back, then, noble pride, for ’tis her dower!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How could poet ever tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If his passions, hopes, and fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If his triumphs and his tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Kept not measure with his people?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boom, cannon, boom to all the winds and waves!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clash out, glad bells, from every rocking steeple!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Banners, adance with triumph, bend your staves!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And from every mountain-peak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Let beacon-fire to answering beacon speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Katahdin tell Monadnock, Whiteface he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so leap on in light from sea to sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Till the glad news be sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Across a kindling continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making earth feel more firm and air breathe braver:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Be proud! for she is saved, and all have helped to save her!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She that lifts up the manhood of the poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She of the open soul and open door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With room about her hearth for all mankind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The fire is dreadful in her eyes no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From her bold front the helm she doth unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sends all her handmaid armies back to spin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And bids her navies, that so lately hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their crashing battle, hold their thunders in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Swimming like birds of calm along the unharmful shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No challenge sends she to the elder world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That looked askance and hated; a light scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Plays o’er her mouth, as round her mighty knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She calls her children back, and waits the morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nobler day, enthroned between her subject seas.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bow down, dear Land, for thou hast found release!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy God, in these distempered days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath taught thee the sure wisdom of his ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through thine enemies hath wrought thy peace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bow down in prayer and praise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No poorest in thy borders but may now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift to the juster skies a man’s enfranchised brow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Beautiful! my Country! ours once more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smoothing thy gold of war-dishevelled hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er such sweet brows as never other wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And letting thy set lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Freed from wrath’s pale eclipse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rosy edges of their smile lay bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What words divine of lover or of poet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could tell our love and make thee know it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Nations bright beyond compare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What were our lives without thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What all our lives to save thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We reck not what we gave thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We will not dare to doubt thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ask whatever else, and we will dare!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="lenvoi" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">L’Envoi</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To the Muse</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Whither? Albeit I follow fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all life’s circuit I but find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not where thou art, but where thou wast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet beckoner, more fleet than wind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I haunt the pine-dark solitudes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With soft brown silence carpeted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plot to snare thee in the woods:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peace I o’ertake, but thou art fled!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find the rock where thou didst rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moss thy skimming foot hath prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Nature with thy parting thrills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like branches after birds new-flown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy passage hill and hollow fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hints of virtue not their own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dimples still the water slips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou hast dipt thy finger-tips;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Just, just beyond, forever burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gleams of a grace without return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon thy shade I plant my foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through my frame strange raptures shoot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of thee but thyself I grasp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I seem to fold thy luring shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vague air to my bosom clasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou lithe, perpetual Escape!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One mask and then another drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou art secret as before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes with flooded ear I list,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hear thee, wondrous organist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mighty continental stops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thunder of new music pour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through pipes of earth and air and stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy inspiration deep is blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through mountains, forests, open downs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakes, railroads, prairies, states, and towns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy gathering fugue goes rolling on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Maine to utmost Oregon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The factory-wheels in cadence hum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From brawling parties concords come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this I hear, or seem to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when, enchanted, I draw near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mate with words the various theme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life seems a whiff of kitchen steam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>History an organ-grinder’s thrum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thou hast slipt from it and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all thine organ-pipes left dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most mutable Perversity!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not weary yet, I still must seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hope for luck next day, next week;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to see the great man ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shiplike, the swelling human tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That floods to bear him into port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trophied from Senate-hall and Court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy magnetism, I feel it there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy rhythmic presence fleet and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making the Mob a moment fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glimpses of their own Divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in their demigod they see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their cramped ideal soaring free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas thou didst bear the fire about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, like the springing of a mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent up to heaven the street-long shout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full well I know that thou wast here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was thy breath that brushed my ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But vainly in the stress and whirl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dive for thee, the moment’s pearl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through every shape thou well canst run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proteus, ’twixt rise and set of sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well pleased with logger-camps in Maine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As where Milan’s pale Duomo lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranded glacier on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its peaks and pinnacles of ice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melted in many a quaint device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sees, above the city’s din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar its silent Alpine kin:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I track thee over carpets deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wealth’s and beauty’s inmost keep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the sand of bar-room floors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the stale reek of boosing boors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where browse the hay-field’s fragrant heats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the flail-heart of Autumn beats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dog thee through the market’s throngs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the sea with myriad tongues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laps the green edges of the pier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tall ships that eastward steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curtsy their farewells to the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the curved distance lessening down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I follow allwhere for thy sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch thy robe’s hem, but ne’er o’ertake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find where, scarce yet unmoving, lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm from thy limbs, thy last disguise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou another shape hast donned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lurest still just, just beyond!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But here a voice, I know not whence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrills clearly through my inward sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying: ‘See where she sits at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thou in search of her dost roam!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All summer long her ancient wheel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whirls humming by the open door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, when the hickory’s social zeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sets the wide chimney in a roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close-nestled by the tinkling hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It modulates the household mirth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that sweet serious undertone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of duty, music all her own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still as of old she sits and spins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hopes, our sorrows, and our sins;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With equal care she twines the fates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cottages and mighty states;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spins the earth, the air, the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden’s unschooled fancy free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy’s first love, the man’s first grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The budding and the fall o’ the leaf;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The piping west-wind’s snowy care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her their cloudy fleeces spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or from the thorns of evil times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She can glean wool to twist her rhymes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morning and noon and eve supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her their fairest tints for dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever through her twirling thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There spires one line of warmest red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tinged from the homestead’s genial heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stamp and warrant of her art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this Time’s sickle she outwears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blunts the Sisters’ baffled shears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Harass her not: thy heat and stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But greater coyness breed in her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thou mayst find, ere Age’s frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy long apprenticeship not lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learning at last that Stygian Fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unbends to him that knows to wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muse is womanish, nor deigns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her love to him that pules and plains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With proud, averted face she stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him that wooes with empty hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thyself free of Manhood’s guild;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pull down thy barns and greater build;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wood, the mountain, and the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave breast-deep with the poet’s grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pluck thou the sunset’s fruit of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glean from the heavens and ocean old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From fireside lone and trampling street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy life garner daily wheat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The epic of a man rehearse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be something better than thy verse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thyself rich, and then the Muse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall court thy precious interviews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall take thy head upon her knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such enchantment lilt to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shalt hear the life-blood flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From farthest stars to grass-blades low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find the Listener’s science still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transcends the Singer’s deepest skill!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-cathedral" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Cathedral</h2>
			<div epub:type="dedication">
				<p>To</p>
				<p><b>Mr. James T. Fields</b></p>
				<p><b>My Dear Fields</b>:</p>
				<p>Dr. Johnson’s sturdy self-respect led him to invent the Bookseller as a substitute for the Patron. My relations with you have enabled me to discover how pleasantly the Friend may replace the Bookseller. Let me record my sense of many thoughtful services by associating your name with a poem which owes its appearance in this form to your partiality.</p>
				<p>Cordially yours,</p>
				<p><b>J. R. Lowell</b>.</p>
				<p><b>Cambridge</b>, <i>November</i> 29, 1869.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p>
					<span>Far through the memory shines a happy day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cloudless of care, down-shod to every sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And simply perfect from its own resource,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to a bee the new campanula’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illuminate seclusion swung in air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such days are not the prey of setting suns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever blurred with mist of afterthought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like words made magical by poets dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein the music of all meaning is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sense hath garnered or the soul divined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mingle with our life’s ethereal part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweetening and gathering sweetness evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By beauty’s franchise disenthralled of time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I can recall, nay, they are present still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parts of myself, the perfume of my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Days that seem farther off than Homer’s now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere yet the child had loudened to the boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, recluse from playmates, found perforce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companionship in things that not denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor granted wholly; as is Nature’s wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, safe in uncontaminate reserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lets us mistake our longing for her love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mocks with various echo of ourselves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These first sweet frauds upon our consciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blend the sensual with its imaged world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These virginal cognitions, gifts of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere life grow noisy, and slower-footed thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can overtake the rapture of the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thrust between ourselves and what we feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have something in them secretly divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vainly the eye, once schooled to serve the brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pains deliberate studies to renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ideal vision: second-thoughts are prose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For beauty’s acme hath a term as brief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the wave’s poise before it break in pearl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our own breath dims the mirror of the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looking too long and closely: at a flash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We snatch the essential grace of meaning out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that first passion beggars all behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heirs of a tamer transport prepossessed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, seeing once, has truly seen again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gray vague of unsympathizing sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dragged his Fancy from her moorings back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shores inhospitable of eldest time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till blank foreboding of earth-gendered powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitiless seignories in the elements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Omnipotences blind that darkling smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misgave him, and repaganized the world?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, by some subtler touch of sympathy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These primal apprehensions, dimly stirred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perplex the eye with pictures from within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hath made poets dream of lives foregone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In worlds fantastical, more fair than ours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Memory cheats us, glimpsing half-revealed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as I write she tries her wonted spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that continuous redbreast boding rain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bird I hear sings not from yonder elm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the flown ecstasy my childhood heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is vocal in my mind, renewed by him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply made sweeter by the accumulate thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That threads my undivided life and steals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pathos from the years and graves between.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know not how it is with other men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom I but guess, deciphering myself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, once felt is so felt nevermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fleeting relish at sensation’s brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had in it the best ferment of the wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One spring I knew as never any since:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night the surges of the warm southwest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boomed intermittent through the wallowing elms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought a morning from the Gulf adrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Omnipotent with sunshine, whose quick charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Startled with crocuses the sullen turf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wiled the bluebird to his whiff of song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One summer hour abides, what time I perched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dappled with noonday, under simmering leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pulled the pulpy oxhearts, while aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An oriole clattered and the robins shrilled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Denouncing me an alien and a thief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One morn of autumn lords it o’er the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in the lane I watched the ash-leaves fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balancing softly earthward without wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or twirling with directer impulse down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On those fallen yesterday, now barbed with frost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I grew pensive with the pensive year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once I learned how marvellous winter was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When past the fence-rails, downy-gray with rime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I creaked adventurous o’er the spangled crust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made familiar fields seem far and strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those stark wastes that whiten endlessly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ghastly solitude about the pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gleam relentless to the unsetting sun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instant the candid chambers of my brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were painted with these sovran images;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And later visions seem but copies pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those unfading frescos of the past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I, young savage, in my age of flint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazed at, and dimly felt a power in me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parted from Nature by the joy in her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doubtfully revealed me to myself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforward I must stand outside the gate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And paradise was paradise the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Known once and barred against satiety.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What we call Nature, all outside ourselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but our own conceit of what we see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our own reaction upon what we feel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world’s a woman to our shifting mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeling with us, or making due pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore we the more persuade ourselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make all things our thought’s confederates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conniving with us in whate’er we dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So when our Fancy seeks analogies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though she have hidden what she after finds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She loves to cheat herself with feigned surprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I find my own complexion everywhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No rose, I doubt, was ever, like the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A marvel to the bush it dawned upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rapture of its life made visible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mystery of its yearning realized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the first babe to the first woman born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No falcon ever felt delight of wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when, an eyas, from the stolid cliff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loosing himself, he followed his high heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To swim on sunshine, masterless as wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I believe the brown earth takes delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the new snowdrop looking back at her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think that by some vernal alchemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It could transmute her darkness into pearl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is the buxom peony after that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its coarse constancy of hoyden blush?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What the full summer to that wonder new?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, if in nothing else, in us there is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sense fastidious hardly reconciled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the poor makeshifts of life’s scenery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the same slide must double all its parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoved in for Tarsus and hitched back for Tyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I blame not in the soul this daintiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rasher of surfeit than a humming-bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In things indifferent by sense purveyed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It argues her an immortality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dateless incomes of experience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This unthrift housekeeping that will not brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dish warmed-over at the feast of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finds Twice stale, served with whatever sauce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor matters much how it may go with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwell in Grub Street and am proud to drudge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where men, my betters, wet their crust with tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Use can make sweet the peach’s shady side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That only by reflection tastes of sun.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, my Princess, who will sometimes deign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My garret to illumine till the walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Narrow and dingy, scrawled with hackneyed thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Poor Richard slowly elbowing Plato out),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dilate and drape themselves with tapestries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nausikaa might have stooped o’er, while, between,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mirrors, effaced in their own clearness, send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her only image on through deepening deeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With endless repercussion of delight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bringer of life, witching each sense to soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sometimes almost gives me to believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might have been a poet, gives at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brain dasaxonized, an ear that makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Music where none is, and a keener pang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of exquisite surmise outleaping thought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her will I pamper in her luxury:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No crumpled rose-leaf of too careless choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall bring a northern nightmare to her dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vexing with sense of exile; hers shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The invitiate firstlings of experience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vibrations felt but once and felt life long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, more than half-way turn that Grecian front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon me, while with self-rebuke I spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the plain fillet that confines thy hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In conscious bounds of seeming unconstraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <i>Naught in overplus</i>, thy race’s badge!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One feast for her I secretly designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that Old World so strangely beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To us the disinherited of eld⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A day at Chartres, with no soul beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To roil with pedant prate my joy serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make the minster shy of confidence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I went, and, with the Saxon’s pious care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First ordered dinner at the pea-green inn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flies and I its only customers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eluding these, I loitered through the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hope to take my minster unawares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In its grave solitude of memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pretty burgh, and such as Fancy loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bygone grandeurs, faintly rumorous now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the mind’s horizon, as of storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brooding its dreamy thunders far aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mingle with our mood, but not disturb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its once grim bulwarks, tamed to lovers’ walks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look down unwatchful on the sliding Eure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose listless leisure suits the quiet place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lisping among his shallows homelike sounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Concord and by Bankside heard before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chance led me to a public pleasure-ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I grew kindly with the merry groups,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blessed the Frenchman for his simple art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of being domestic in the light of day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His language has no word, we growl, for Home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he can find a fireside in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Play with his child, make love, and shriek his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By throngs of strangers undisprivacied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He makes his life a public gallery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor feels himself till what he feels comes back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In manifold reflection from without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While we, each pore alert with consciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hide our best selves as we had stolen them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each bystander a detective were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keen-eyed for every chink of undisguise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, musing o’er the problem which was best⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A life wide-windowed, shining all abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or curtains drawn to shield from sight profane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rites we pay to the mysterious I⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With outward senses furloughed and head bowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I followed some fine instinct in my feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, to unbend me from the loom of thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looking up suddenly, I found mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confronted with the minster’s vast repose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent and gray as forest-leaguered cliff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left inland by the ocean’s slow retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hears afar the breeze-borne rote and longs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembering shocks of surf that clomb and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spume-sliding down the baffled decuman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It rose before me, patiently remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the great tides of life it breasted once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing the noise of men as in a dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stood before the triple northern port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where dedicated shapes of saints and kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stern faces bleared with immemorial watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked down benignly grave and seemed to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Ye come and go incessant; we remain</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Safe in the hallowed quiets of the past</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Be reverent, ye who flit and are forgot</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Of faith so nobly realized as this.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I seem to have heard it said by learnèd folk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who drench you with æsthetics till you feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if all beauty were a ghastly bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faucet to let loose a wash of words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Gothic is not Grecian, therefore worse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, being convinced by much experiment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How little inventiveness there is in man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grave copier of copies, I give thanks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a new relish, careless to inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pleasure’s pedigree, if so it please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nobly, I mean, nor renegade to art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian gluts me with its perfectness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unanswerable as Euclid, self-contained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one thing finished in this hasty world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever finished, though the barbarous pit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fanatical on hearsay, stamp and shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if a miracle could be encored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! this other, this that never ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still climbing, luring fancy still to climb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As full of morals half-divined as life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Graceful, grotesque, with ever new surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hazardous caprices sure to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy as nightmare, airy-light as fern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination’s very self in stone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one long sigh of infinite release</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From pedantries past, present, or to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked, and owned myself a happy Goth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your blood is mine, ye architects of dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Builders of aspiration incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So more consummate, souls self-confident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who felt your own thought worthy of record</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In monumental pomp! No Grecian drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rebukes these veins that leap with kindred thrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After long exile, to the mother-tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ovid in Pontus, puling for his Rome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men invirile and disnatured dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That poison sucked from the Attic bloom decayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrank with a shudder from the blue-eyed race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose force rough-handed should renew the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the dregs of Romulus express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such wine as Dante poured, or he who blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roland’s vain blast, or sang the Campeador</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In verse that clanks like armor in the charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homeric juice, though brimmed in Odin’s horn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they could build, if not the columned fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the height gleamed seaward many-hued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something more friendly with their ruder skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gray spire, molten now in driving mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now lulled with the incommunicable blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carvings touched to meaning new with snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or commented with fleeting grace of shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The statues, motley as man’s memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Partial as that, so mixed of true and false,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>History and legend meeting with a kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across this bound-mark where their realms confine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The painted windows, freaking gloom with glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dusking the sunshine which they seem to cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet symbol of the senses and the soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the whole pile, grim with the Northman’s thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life and death, and doom, life’s equal fee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These were before me: and I gazed abashed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Child of an age that lectures, not creates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plastering our swallow-nests on the awful Past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twittering round the work of larger men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we had builded what we but deface.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far up the great bells wallowed in delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tossing their clangors o’er the heedless town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To call the worshippers who never came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or women mostly, in loath twos and threes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I entered, reverent of whatever shrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guards piety and solace for my kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or gives the soul a moment’s truce of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shared decorous in the ancient rite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sterner fathers held idolatrous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The service over, I was tranced in thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemn the deepening vaults, and most to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh from the fragile realm of deal and paint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or brick mock-pious with a marble front;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemn the lift of high-embowered roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clustered stems that spread in boughs disleaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the organ blew a dream of storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though not more potent to sublime with awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shut the heart up to tranquillity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than aisles to me familiar that o’erarch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conscious silences of brooding woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Centurial shadows, cloisters of the elk:,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet here was sense of undefined regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Irreparable loss, uncertain what:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was all this grandeur but anachronism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shell divorced of its informing life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the priest housed him like a hermit-crab,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An alien to that faith of elder days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gathered round it this fair shape of stone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is old Religion but a spectre now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunting the solitude of darkened minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mocked out of memory by the sceptic day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no corner safe from peeping Doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Gutenberg made thought cosmopolite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stretched electric threads from mind to mind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, did Faith build this wonder? or did Fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes a fetish and misnames it God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Blockish or metaphysic, matters not),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contrive this coop to shut its tyrant in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeased with playthings, that he might not harm?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I turned and saw a beldame on her knees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes astray, she told mechanic beads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before some shrine of saintly womanhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bribed intercessor with the far-off Judge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such my first thought, by kindlier soon rebuked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleading for whatsoever touches life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With upward impulse: be He nowhere else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God is in all that liberates and lifts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all that humbles, sweetens, and consoles:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessed the natures shored on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With landmarks of hereditary thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice happy they that wander not life long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond near succor of the household faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guarded fold that shelters, not confines!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their steps find patience In familiar paths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Printed with hope by loved feet gone before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of parent, child, or lover, glorified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By simple magic of dividing Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lids were moistened as the woman knelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—was it will, or some vibration faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sacred Nature, deeper than the will?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart occultly felt itself in hers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through mutual intercession gently leagued.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or was it not mere sympathy of brain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sweetness intellectually conceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In simpler creeds to me impossible?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A juggle of that pity for ourselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In others, which puts on such pretty masks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snares self-love with bait of charity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something of all it might be, or of none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for a moment I was snatched away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had the evidence of things not seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one rapt moment; then it all came back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This age that blots out life with question-marks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This nineteenth century with its knife and glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That make thought physical, and thrust far off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Heaven, so neighborly with man of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To voids sparse-sown with alienated stars.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis irrecoverable, that ancient faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homely and wholesome, suited to the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rod or candy for child-minded men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No theologic tube, with lens on lens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of syllogism transparent, brings it near⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At best resolving some new nebula,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or blurring some fixed-star of hope to mist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Science was Faith once; Faith were Science now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would she but lay her bow and arrows by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arm her with the weapons of the time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing that keeps thought out is safe from thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there’s no virgin-fort but self-respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Truth defensive hath lost hold on God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we treat Him as if He were a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knew not his own purpose? nor dare trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Rock of Ages to their chemic tests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest some day the all-sustaining base divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should fail from under us, dissolved in gas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The armèd eye that with a glance discerns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a dry blood-speck between ox and man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stares helpless at this miracle called life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This shaping potency behind the egg,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This circulation swift of deity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where suns and systems inconspicuous float</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the poor blood-disks in our mortal veins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each age must worship its own thought of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More or less earthy, clarifying still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With subsidence continuous of the dregs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor saint nor sage could fix immutably</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fluent image of the unstable Best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still changing in their very hands that wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day’s eternal truth To-morrow proved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frail as frost-landscapes on a window-pane.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile Thou smiledst, inaccessible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Thought’s own substance made a cage for Thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Truth locked fast with her own master-key;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor didst Thou reck what image man might make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his own shadow on the flowing world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The climbing instinct was enough for Thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wast Thou, then, an ebbing tide that left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strewn with dead miracle those eldest shores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For men to dry, and dryly lecture on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself thenceforth incapable of flood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idle who hopes with prophets to be snatched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By virtue in their mantles left below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall the soul live on other men’s report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself a pleasing fable of herself?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man cannot be God’s outlaw if he would,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor so abscond him in the caves of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Nature stall shall search some crevice out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With messages of splendor from that Source</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, dive he, soar he, baffles still and lures.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This life were brutish did we not sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have intimation clear of wider scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hints of occasion infinite, to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul alert with noble discontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onward yearnings of unstilled desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fruitless, except we now and then divined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mystery of Purpose, gleaming through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The secular confusions of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose will we darkly accomplish, doing ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man can think nor in himself perceive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes at waking, in the street sometimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on the hillside, always unforwarned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grace of being, finer than himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That beckons and is gone⁠—a larger life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his own impinging, with swift glimpse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of spacious circles luminous with mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the ethereal substance of his own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems but gross cloud to make that visible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touched to a sudden glory round the edge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who that hath known these visitations fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would strive to make them trite and ritual?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, that still pray at morning and at eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loving those roots that feed us from the past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prizing more than Plato things I learned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that best academe, a mother’s knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice in my life perhaps have truly prayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice, stirred below my conscious self, have felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That perfect disenthralment which is God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor know I which to hold worst enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him who on speculation’s windy waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would turn me loose, stript of the raiment warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Faith contrived against our nakedness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or him who, cruel-kind, would fain obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With painted saints and paraphrase of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul’s east-window of divine surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where others worship I but look and long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though not recreant to my fathers’ faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its forms to me are weariness, and most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drony vacuum of compulsory prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still pumping phrases for the Ineffable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though all the valves of memory gasp and wheeze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Words that have drawn transcendent meanings up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the best passion of all bygone time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steeped through with tears of triumph and remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet with all sainthood, cleansed in martyr-fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can they, so consecrate and so inspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By repetition wane to vexing wind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! we cannot draw habitual breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the thin air of life’s supremer heights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We cannot make each meal a sacrament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with our tailors be disbodied souls⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We men, too conscious of earth’s comedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who see two sides, with our posed selves debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only for great stakes can be sublime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us be thankful when, as I do here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We can read Bethel on a pile of stones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, seeing where God <i>has</i> been, trust in Him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Brave Peter Fischer there in Nuremberg,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moulding Saint Sebald’s miracles in bronze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put saint and stander-by in that quaint garb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Familiar to him in his daily walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not doubting God could grant a miracle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then and in Nuremberg, if so He would;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never artist for three hundred years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath dared the contradiction ludicrous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of supernatural in modern clothes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps the deeper faith that is to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will see God rather in the strenuous doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than in the creed held as an infant’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holds purposeless whatso is placed therein.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Say it is drift, not progress, none the less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the old sextant of the fathers’ creed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We shape our courses by new-risen stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, still lip-loyal to what once was truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smuggle new meanings under ancient names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unconscious perverts of the Jesuit, Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Change is the mask that all Continuance wears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep us youngsters harmlessly amused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile some ailing or more watchful child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting apart, sees the old eyes gleam out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stern, and yet soft with humorous pity too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilere, men burnt men for a doubtful point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the mind were quenchable with fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Faith danced round them with her war-paint on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoutly savage as an Iroquois;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Calvin and Servetus at one board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snuff in grave sympathy a milder roast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er their claret settle Comte unread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fagot and stake were desperately sincere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our cooler martyrdoms are done in types;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flames that shine in controversial eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burn out no brains but his who kindles them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is no age to get cathedrals built:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did God, then, wait for one in Bethlehem?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worst is not yet: lo, where his coming looms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of earth’s anarchic children latest born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Democracy, a Titan who hath learned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To laugh at Jove’s old-fashioned thunder-bolts⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could he not also forge them, if he would?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, better skilled, with solvents merciless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loosened in air and borne on every wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saps unperceived: the calm Olympian height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ancient order feels its bases yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pale gods glance for help to gods as pale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What will be left of good or worshipful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of spiritual secrets, mysteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fair religion’s guarded heritage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heirlooms of soul, passed downward unprofaned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From eldest Ind? This Western giant coarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scorning refinements which he lacks himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves not nor heeds the ancestral hierarchies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each rank dependent on the next above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ordinary gradation fixed as fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King by mere manhood, nor allowing aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of holier unction than the sweat of toil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his own strength sufficient; called to solve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the rough edges of society,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Problems long sacred to the choicer few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And improvise what elsewhere men receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As gifts of deity; tough foundling reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every man’s his own Melchisedek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How make him reverent of a King of kings?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Judge self-made, executor of laws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him not first discussed and voted on?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him no tree of knowledge is forbid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sweeter if forbid. How save the ark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or holy of holies, unprofaned a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his unscrupulous curiosity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That handles everything as if to buy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tossing aside what fabrics delicate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suit not the rough-and-tumble of his ways?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hope for those fine-nerved humanities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made earth gracious once with gentler arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the rude hands have caught the trick of thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And claim an equal suffrage with the brain?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The born disciple of an elder time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(To me sufficient, friendlier than the new,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in my blood feel motions of the Past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thank benignant nature most for this⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A force of sympathy, or call it lack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of character firm-planted, loosing me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the pent chamber of habitual self</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dwell enlarged in alien modes of thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply distasteful, wholesomer for that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through imagination to possess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they were mine, the lives of other men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This growth original of virgin soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By fascination felt in opposites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleases and shocks, entices and perturbs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this brown-fisted rough, this shirt-sleeved Cid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This backwoods Charlemagne of empires new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose blundering heel instinctively finds out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goutier foot of speechless dignities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, meeting Cæsar’s self, would slap his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call him ‘Old Horse,’ and challenge to a drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lungs draw braver air, my breast dilates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ampler manhood, and I front both worlds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sense and spirit, as my natural fiefs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shape and then reshape them as I will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was the first man’s charter; why not mine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How forfeit? when, deposed in other hands?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou shudder’st, Ovid? Dost in him forebode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new avatar of the large-limbed Goth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break, or seem to break, tradition’s clue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chase to dreamland back thy gods dethroned?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think man’s soul dwells nearer to the east,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nearer to morning’s fountains than the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself the source whence all tradition sprang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself at once both labyrinth and clue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The miracle fades out of history,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But faith and wonder and the primal earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are born into the world with every child.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall this self-maker with the prying eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This creature disenchanted of respect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the New World’s new fiend, Publicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose testing thumb leaves everywhere its smutch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not one day feel within himself the need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of loyalty to better than himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall ennoble him with the upward look?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall he not catch the Voice that wanders earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With spiritual summons, dreamed or heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sometimes, just ere sleep seals up the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hear our mother call from deeps of Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, waking, find it vision⁠—none the less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The benediction bides, old skies return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that unreal thing, preëminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes air and dream of all we see and feel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall he divine no strength unmade of votes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inward, impregnable, found soon as sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not cognizable of sense, o’er sense supreme?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else were he desolate as none before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His holy places may not be of stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor made with hands, yet fairer far than aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By artist feigned or pious ardor reared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit altars for who guards inviolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s chosen seat, the sacred form of man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtless his church will be no hospital</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For superannuate forms and mumping shams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No parlor where men issue policies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life-assurance on the Eternal Mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor his religion but an ambulance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fetch life’s wounded and malingerers in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scorned by the strong; yet he, unconscious heir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Influence sweet of Athens and of Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And old Judaea’s gift of secret fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spite of himself shall surely learn to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And worship some ideal of himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some divine thing, large-hearted, brotherly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not nice in trifles, a soft creditor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleased with his world, and hating only cant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if his Church be doubtful, it is sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, in a world, made for whatever else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not made for mere enjoyment, in a world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of toil but half-requited, or, at best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paid in some futile currency of breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A world of incompleteness, sorrow swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And consolation laggard, whatsoe’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The form of building or the creed professed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Cross, bold type of shame to homage turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an unfinished life that sways the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall tower as sovereign emblem over all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The kobold Thought moves with us when we shift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our dwelling to escape him; perched aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the first load of household-stuff he went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, where the mind goes, goes old furniture.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who to Chartres came to feed my eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give to Fancy one clear holiday,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce saw the minster for the thoughts it stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buzzing o’er past and future with vain quest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here once there stood a homely wooden church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which slow devotion nobly changed for this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That echoes vaguely to my modern steps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By suffrage universal it was built,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As practised then, for all the country came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far as Rouen, to give votes for God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each vote a block of stone securely laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obedient to the master’s deep-mused plan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will what our ballots rear, responsible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To no grave forethought, stand so long as this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delight like this the eye of after days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brightening with pride that here, at least, were men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who meant and did the noblest thing they knew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can our religion cope with deeds like this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We, too, build Gothic contract-shams, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our deacons have discovered that it pays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pews sell better under vaulted roofs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of plaster painted like an Indian squaw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall not that Western Goth, of whom we spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fiercely practical, so keen of eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find out, some day, that nothing pays but God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Served whether on the smoke-shut battle-field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In work obscure done honestly, or vote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truth unpopular, or faith maintained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ruinous convictions, or good deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought for good’s sake, mindless of heaven or hell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall he not learn that all prosperity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bases stretch not deeper than the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but a trick of this world’s atmosphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A desert-born mirage of spire and dome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or find too late, the Past’s long lesson missed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dust the prophets shake from off their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows heavy to drag down both tower and wall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not; but, sustained by sure belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That man still rises level with the height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noblest opportunities, or makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such, if the time supply not, I can wait.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I gaze round on the windows, pride of France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each the bright gift of some mechanic guild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loved their city and thought gold well spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make her beautiful with piety;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pause, transfigured by some stripe of bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my mind throngs with shining auguries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circle on circle, bright as seraphim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With golden trumpets, silent, that await</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The signal to blow news of good to men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the revulsion came that always comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After these dizzy elations of the mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a passionate pang of doubt I cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O mountain-born, sweet with snow-filtered air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From uncontaminate wells of ether drawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never-broken secrecies of sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freedom, with anguish won, misprized till lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They keep thee not who from thy sacred eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catch the consuming lust of sensual good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the brute’s license of unfettered will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the popular shout and venal breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cleon blowing the mob’s baser mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bubbles of wind-piloted conceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shrinkest, gathering up thy skirts, to hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fortresses of solitary thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And private virtue strong in self-restraint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must we too forfeit thee misunderstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content with names, nor inly wise to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That best things perish of their own excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quality o’er-driven becomes defect?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, is it thou indeed that we have glimpsed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rather such illusion as of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Athens glided menadlike and Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shape of vapor, mother of vain dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mutinous traditions, specious plea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the glaived tyrant and long-memoried priest?’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I walked forth saddened; for all thought is sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaves a bitterish savor in the brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tonic, it may be, not delectable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turned, reluctant, for a parting look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At those old weather-pitted images</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bygone struggle, now so sternly calm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About their shoulders sparrows had built nests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fluttered, chirping, from gray perch to perch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now on a mitre poising, now a crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Irreverently happy. While I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How confident they were, what careless hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew on those lightsome wings and shared the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A larger shadow crossed; and looking up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw where, nesting in the hoary towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sparrow-hawk slid forth on noiseless air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sidelong head that watched the joy below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grim Norman baron o’er this clan of Kelts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enduring Nature, force conservative,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indifferent to our noisy whims! Men prate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all heads to an equal grade cashiered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On level with the dullest, and expect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Sick of no worse distemper than themselves)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wondrous cure-all in equality;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They reason that To-morrow must be wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because To-day was not, nor Yesterday,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if good days were shapen of themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of the very lifeblood of men’s souls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile, long-suffering, imperturbable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou quietly complet’st thy syllogism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the premise sparrow here below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw’st sure conclusion of the hawk above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleased with the soft-billed songster, pleased no less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the fierce beak of natures aquiline.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou beautiful Old Time, now hid away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Past’s valley of Avilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply, like Arthur, till thy wound be healed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to reclaim the sword and crown again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice beautiful to us; perchance less fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To who possessed thee, as a mountain seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dwellers round its bases but a heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of barren obstacle that lairs the storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the avalanche’s silent bolt holds back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leashed with a hair⁠—meanwhile some far-off clown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hereditary delver of the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees it an unmoved vision of repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nest of the morning, and conjectures there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dance of streams to idle shepherds’ pipes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fairer habitations softly hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On breezy slopes, or hid in valleys cool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For happier men. No mortal ever dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the scant isthmus he encamps upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between two oceans, one, the Stormy, passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one, the Peaceful, yet to venture on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been that future whereto prophets yearned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the fulfilment of Earth’s cheated hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be that past which nerveless poets moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the lost opportunity of song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Power, more near my life than life itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or what seems life to us in sense immured),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the roots, shut in the darksome earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Share in the tree-top’s joyance, and conceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sunshine and wide air and wingèd things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sympathy of nature, so do I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have evidence of Thee so far above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in and of me! Rather Thou the root</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invisibly sustaining, hid in light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not darkness, or in darkness made by us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If sometimes I must hear good men debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other witness of Thyself than Thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if there needed any help of ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nurse Thy flickering life, that else must cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blown out, as ’twere a candle, by men’s breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul shall not be taken in their snare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change her inward surety for their doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muffled from sight in formal robes of proof:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While she can only feel herself through Thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear not Thy withdrawal; more I fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing, to know Thee not, hoodwinked with dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of signs and wonders, while, unnoticed, Thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walking Thy garden still, commun’st with men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Missed in the commonplace of miracle.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="three-memorial-poems" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Three Memorial Poems</h2>
			<div epub:type="epigraph">
				<blockquote>
					<p>
						<span class="i6">‘Coscienza fusca</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O della propria o dell’ altrui vergogna</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pur sentirà la tua parola brusca.’</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>If I let fall a word of bitter mirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When public shames more shameful pardon won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some have misjudged me, and my service done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If small, yet faithful, deemed of little worth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through veins that drew their life from Western earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two hundred years and more my blood hath run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In no polluted course from sire to son;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus was I predestined ere my birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love the soil wherewith my fibres own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instinctive sympathies; yet love it so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As honor would, nor lightly to dethrone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judgment, the stamp of manhood, nor forego</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son’s right to a mother dearer grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With growing knowledge and more chaste than snow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="dedication">
				<p>To</p>
				<p><b>E. L. Godkin</b>,</p>
				<p><b>In cordial acknowledgment of his eminent service in heightening and purifying the tone of our political thought</b>,</p>
				<p><b>these Three Poems</b></p>
				<p><b>are dedicated</b>.</p>
			</div>
			<p epub:type="bridgehead">Readers, it is hoped, will remember that, by his Ode at the Harvard Commemoration, the author had precluded himself from many of the natural outlets of thought and feeling common to such occasions as are celebrated in these poems.</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h3 epub:type="title">Ode</h3>
						<p epub:type="subtitle">Read at the One Hundredth Anniversary of the Fight at Concord Bridge</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">19th April, 1875</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Who cometh over the hills,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her garments with morning sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dance of a thousand rills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Making music before her feet?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her presence freshens the air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sunshine steals light from her face;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The leaden footstep of Care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaps to the tune of her pace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fairness of all that is fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grace at the heart of all grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweetener of hut and of hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bringer of life out of naught,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Freedom, oh, fairest of all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The daughters of Time and Thought!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>She cometh, cometh to-day:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hark! hear ye not her tread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sending a thrill through your clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the sod there, ye dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her nurslings and champions?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do ye not hear, as she comes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bay of the deep-mouthed guns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gathering rote of the drums?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The belts that called ye to prayer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How wildly they clamor on her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crying, ‘She cometh! prepare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her to praise and her to honor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That a hundred years ago</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scattered here in blood and tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Potent seeds wherefrom should grow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gladness for a hundred years!’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Tell me, young men, have ye seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Creature of diviner mien</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For true hearts to long and cry for,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Manly hearts to live and die for?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What hath she that others want?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brows that all endearments haunt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eyes that make it sweet to dare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smiles that cheer untimely death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looks that fortify despair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tones more brave than trumpet’s breath;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell me, maidens, have ye known</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Household charm more sweetly rare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grace of woman ampler blown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Modesty more debonair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Younger heart with wit full grown?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh for an hour of my prime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pulse of my hotter years,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I might praise her in rhyme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would tingle your eyelids to tears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our sweetness, our strength, and our star,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our hope, our joy, and our trust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who lifted us out of the dust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made us whatever we are!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Whiter than moonshine upon snow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her raiment is, but round the hem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crimson stained; and, as to and fro</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her sandals flash, we see on them,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on her instep veined with blue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flecks of crimson, on those fair feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High-arched, Diana-like, and fleet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit for no grosser stain than dew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh, call them rather chrisms than stains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sacred and from heroic veins!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, in the glory-guarded pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her haughty and far-shining head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She bowed to shrive Leonidas</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With his imperishable dead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her, too, Morgarten saw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where the Swiss lion fleshed his icy paw;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She followed Cromwell’s quenchless star</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where the grim Puritan tread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shook Marston, Naseby, and Dunbar:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yea, on her feet are dearer dyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet fresh, nor looked on with untearful eyes.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Our fathers found her in the woods</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Nature meditates and broods,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The seeds of unexampled things</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which Time to consummation brings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through life and death and man’s unstable moods;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They met her here, not recognized,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sylvan huntress clothed in furs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whose chaste wants her bow sufficed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor dreamed what destinies were hers:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She taught them bee-like to create</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their simpler forms of Church and State;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She taught them to endue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The past with other functions than it knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn in channels strange the uncertain stream of Fate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better than all, she fenced them in their need</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With iron-handed Duty’s sternest creed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Gainst Self’s lean wolf that ravens word and deed.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Why cometh she hither to-day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To this low village of the plain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Far from the Present’s loud highway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Trade’s cool heart and seething brain?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why cometh she? She was not far away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since the soul touched it, not in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pathos of Immortal gain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis here her fondest memories stay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She loves yon pine-bemurmured ridge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where now our broad-browed poet sleeps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dear to both Englands; near him he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who wore the ring of Canace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But most her heart to rapture leaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where stood that era-parting bridge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’er which, with footfall still as dew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Old Time passed into the New;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where, as your stealthy river creeps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He whispers to his listening weeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tales of sublimest homespun deeds.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here English law and English thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Gainst the self-will of England fought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And here were men (coequal with their fate),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who did great things, unconscious they were great.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They dreamed not what a die was cast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With that first answering shot; what then?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There was their duty; they were men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Schooled the soul’s inward gospel to obey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though leading to the lion’s den.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They felt the habit-hallowed world give way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath their lives, and on went they,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unhappy who was last.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Buttrick gave the word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That awful idol of the unchallenged Past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strong in their love, and in their lineage strong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell crashing; if they heard it not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet the earth heard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor ever hath forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As on from startled throne to throne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Superstition sate or conscious Wrong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A shudder ran of some dread birth unknown.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrice venerable spot!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>River more fateful than the Rubicon!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’er those red planks, to snatch her diadem,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man’s Hope, star-girdled, sprang with them,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And over ways untried the feet of Doom strode on.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Think you these felt no charms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In their gray homesteads and embowered farms?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In household faces waiting at the door</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their evening step should lighten up no more?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In fields their boyish feet had known?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In trees their fathers’ hands had set,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And which with them had grown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Widening each year their leafy coronet?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Felt they no pang of passionate regret</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those unsolid goods that seem so much our own?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These things are dear to every man that lives,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And life prized more for what it lends than gives.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yea, many a tie, through iteration sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strove to detain their fatal feet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet the enduring half they chose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose choice decides a man life’s slave or king,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The invisible things of God before the seen and known:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore their memory inspiration blows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With echoes gathering on from zone to zone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For manhood is the one immortal thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath Time’s changeful sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, where it lightened once, from age to age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men come to learn, in grateful pilgrimage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That length of days is knowing when to die.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What marvellous change of things and men!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, a world-wandering orphan then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So mighty now! Those are her streams</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That whirl the myriad, myriad wheels</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all that does, and all that dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all that thinks, and all that feels,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through spaces stretched from sea to sea;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By idle tongues and busy brains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By who doth right, and who refrains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here are our losses and our gains;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our maker and our victim she.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Maiden half mortal, half divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We triumphed in thy coming; to the brinks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our hearts were filled with pride’s tumultuous wine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better to-day who rather feels than thinks.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet will some graver thoughts intrude,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cares of sterner mood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They won thee: who shall keep thee? From the deeps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where discrowned empires o’er their ruins brood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And many a thwarted hope wrings its weak hands and weeps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I hear the voice as of a mighty wind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From all heaven’s caverns rushing unconfined,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘I, Freedom, dwell with Knowledge: I abide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With men whom dust of faction cannot blind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the slow tracings of the Eternal Mind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With men by culture trained and fortified,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who bitter duty to sweet lusts prefer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fearless to counsel and obey.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conscience my sceptre is, and law my sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be drawn in passion or in play,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But terrible to punish and deter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Implacable as God’s word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like it, a shepherd’s crook to them that blindly err.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your firm-pulsed sires, my martyrs and my saints,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offshoots of that one stock whose patient sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath known to mingle flux with permanence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rated my chaste denials and restraints</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above the moment’s dear-paid paradise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beware lest, shifting with Time’s gradual creep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The light that guided shine into your eyes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The envious Powers of ill nor wink nor sleep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be therefore timely wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor laugh when this one steals, and that one lies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if your luck could cheat those sleepless spies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till the deaf Fury comes your house to sweep!’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I hear the voice, and unaffrighted bow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye shall not be prophetic now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heralds of ill, that darkening fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between my vision and the rainbowed sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or on the left your hoarse forebodings croak</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From many a blasted bough</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Yggdrasil’s storm-sinewed oak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That once was green, Hope of the West, as thou;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet pardon if I tremble while I boast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I have loved as those who pardon most.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Away, ungrateful doubt, away!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At least she is our own to-day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Break into rapture, my song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Verses, leap forth in the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearing the joyance along</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a train of fire as ye run!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pause not for choosing of words,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let them but blossom and sing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blithe as the orchards and birds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the new coming of spring!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dance in your jollity, bells;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shout, cannon; cease not, ye drums;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Answer, ye hillside and dells;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bow, all ye people! She comes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Radiant, calm-fronted, as when</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She hallowed that April day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stay with us! Yes, thou shalt stay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Softener and strengthener of men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Freedom, not won by the vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be courted in play,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be kept without pain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stay with us! Yes, thou wilt stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Handmaid and mistress of all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kindler of deed and of thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou that to hut and to hall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equal deliverance brought!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Souls of her martyrs, draw near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Touch our dull lips with your fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we may praise without fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her our delight, our desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our faith’s inextinguishable star,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our hope, our remembrance, our trust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our present, our past, our to be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who will mingle her life with our dust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes us deserve to be free!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Under the Old Elm</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Poem Read at Cambridge on the Hundredth Anniversary of Washington’s Taking Command of the American Army, 3d July, 1775</p>
				</hgroup>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Words pass as wind, but where great deeds were done</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A power abides transfused from sire to son:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The boy feels deeper meanings thrill his ear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That tingling through his pulse life-long shall run,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With sure impulsion to keep honor clear.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When, pointing down, his father whispers, ‘Here,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here, where we stand, stood he, the purely great,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose soul no siren passion could unsphere,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then nameless, now a power and mixed with fate.’</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Historic town, thou holdest sacred dust,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Once known to men as pious, learnèd, just,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And one memorial pile that dares to last:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But Memory greets with reverential kiss</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No spot in all thy circuit sweet as this,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Touched by that modest glory as it past,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O’er which yon elm hath piously displayed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These hundred years its monumental shade.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Of our swift passage through this scenery</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of life and death, more durable than we,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What landmark so congenial as a tree</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Repeating its green legend every spring,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, with a yearly ring,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Recording the fair seasons as they flee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Type of our brief but still-renewed mortality?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We fall as leaves: the immortal trunk remains,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Builded with costly juice of hearts and brains</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Gone to the mould now, whither all that be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Vanish returnless, yet are procreant still</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In human lives to come of good or ill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And feed unseen the roots of Destiny.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Men’s monuments, grown old, forget their names</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They should eternize, but the place</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where shining souls have passed imbibes a grace</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beyond mere earth; some sweetness of their fames</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Leaves in the soil its unextinguished trace,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pungent, pathetic, sad with nobler aims,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That penetrates our lives and heightens them or shames.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This insubstantial world and fleet</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seems solid for a moment when we stand</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On dust ennobled by heroic feet</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Once mighty to sustain a tottering land,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And mighty still such burthen to upbear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor doomed to tread the path of things that merely were:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Our sense, refined with virtue of the spot,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Across the mists of Lethe’s sleepy stream</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Recalls him, the sole chief without a blot,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No more a pallid image and a dream,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But as he dwelt with men decorously supreme.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Our grosser minds need this terrestrial hint</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To raise long-buried days from tombs of print;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>‘Here stood he,’ softly we repeat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And lo, the statue shrined and still</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In that gray minster-front we call the Past,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Feels in its frozen veins our pulses thrill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Breathes living air and mocks at Death’s deceit.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It warms, it stirs, comes down to us at last,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Its features human with familiar light,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A man, beyond the historian’s art to kill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or sculptor’s to efface with patient chisel-blight.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Sure the dumb earth hath memory, nor for naught</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was Fancy given, on whose enchanted loom</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Present and Past commingle, fruit and bloom</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of one fair bough, inseparably wrought</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Into the seamless tapestry of thought.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So charmed, with undeluded eye we see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In history’s fragmentary tale</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bright clues of continuity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Learn that high natures over Time prevail,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And feel ourselves a link in that entail</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That binds all ages past with all that are to be.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Beneath our consecrated elm</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A century ago he stood,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Famed vaguely for that old fight in the wood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose red surge sought, but could not overwhelm</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The life foredoomed to wield our rough-hewn helm:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From colleges, where now the gown</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To arms had yielded, from the town,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Our rude self-summoned levies flocked to see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The new-come chiefs and wonder which was he.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No need to question long; close-lipped and tall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Long trained in murder-brooding forests lone</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To bridle others’ clamors and his own,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Firmly erect, he towered above them all,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The incarnate discipline that was to free</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With iron curb that armed democracy.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>A motley rout was that which came to stare,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In raiment tanned by years of sun and storm,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of every shape that was not uniform,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dotted with regimentals here and there;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>An array all of captains, used to pray</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And stiff in fight, but serious drill’s despair,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Skilled to debate their orders, not obey;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Deacons were there, selectmen, men of note</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In half-tamed hamlets ambushed round with woods,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ready to settle Freewill by a vote,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But largely liberal to its private moods;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Prompt to assert by manners, voice, or pen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or ruder arms, their rights as Englishmen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor much fastidious as to how and when:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet seasoned stuff and fittest to create</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A thought-staid army or a lasting state:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Haughty they said he was, at first; severe;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But owned, as all men own, the steady hand</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Upon the bridle, patient to command,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Prized, as all prize, the justice pure from fear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And learned to honor first, then love him, then revere.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such power there is in clear-eyed self-restraint</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And purpose clean as light from every selfish taint.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Musing beneath the legendary tree,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The years between furl off: I seem to see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The sun-flecks, shaken the stirred foliage through,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dapple with gold his sober buff and blue</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And weave prophetic aureoles round the head</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That shines our beacon now nor darkens with the dead.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O man of silent mood,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A stranger among strangers then,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How art thou since renowned the Great, the Good,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Familiar as the day in an the homes of men!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The winged years, that winnow praise and blame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Blow many names out: they but fan to flame</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The self-renewing splendors of thy fame.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>How many subtlest influences unite,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With spiritual touch of Joy or pain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Invisible as air and soft as light,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To body forth that image of the brain</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We call our Country, visionary shape,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Loved more than woman, fuller of fire than wine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose charm can none define,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor any, though he flee it, can escape!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All party-colored threads the weaver Time</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sets in his web, now trivial, now sublime,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All memories, all forebodings, hopes and fears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mountain and river, forest, prairie, sea,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A hill, a rock, a homestead, field, or tree,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The casual gleanings of unreckoned years,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Take goddess-shape at last and there is She,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Old at our birth, new as the springing hours,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shrine of our weakness, fortress of our powers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Consoler, kindler, peerless ‘mid her peers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A force that ’neath our conscious being stirs,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A life to give ours permanence, when we</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are borne to mingle our poor earth with hers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all this glowing world goes with us on our biers.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Nations are long results, by ruder ways</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Gathering the might that warrants length of days;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They may be pieced of half-reluctant shares</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Welded by hammer-strokes of broad-brained kings,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or from a doughty people grow, the heirs</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of wise traditions widening cautious rings;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At best they are computable things,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A strength behind us making us feel bold</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In right, or, as may chance, in wrong;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose force by figures may be summed and told,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So many soldiers, ships, and dollars strong,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And we but drops that bear compulsory part</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In the dumb throb of a mechanic heart;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But Country is a shape of each man’s mind</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sacred from definition, unconfined</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By the cramped walls where daily drudgeries grind;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>An inward vision, yet an outward birth</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of sweet familiar heaven and earth;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A brooding Presence that stirs motions blind</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of wings within our embryo being’s shell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That wait but her completer spell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To make us eagle-natured, fit to dare</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Life’s nobler spaces and untarnished air.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>You, who hold dear this self-conceived ideal,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose faith and works alone can make it real,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bring all your fairest gifts to deck her shrine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who lifts our lives away from Thine and Mine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And feeds the lamp of manhood more divine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With fragrant oils of quenchless constancy.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When all have done their utmost, surely he</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hath given the best who gives a character</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Erect and constant, which nor any shock</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of loosened elements, nor the forceful sea</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of flowing or of ebbing fates, can stir</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From its deep bases in the living rock</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of ancient manhood’s sweet security:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And this he gave, serenely far from pride</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As baseness, boon with prosperous stars allied,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Part of what nobler seed shall in our loins abide.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>4.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>No bond of men as common pride so strong,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In names time-filtered for the lips of song,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Still operant, with the primal Forces bound</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose currents, on their spiritual round,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Transfuse our mortal will nor are gainsaid:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These are their arsenals, these the exhaustless mines</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That give a constant heart in great designs;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These are the stuff whereof such dreams are made</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As make heroic men: thus surely he</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Still holds in place the massy blocks he laid</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Neath our new frame, enforcing soberly</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The self-control that makes and keeps a people free.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Oh, for a drop of that Cornelian ink</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which gave Agricola dateless length of days,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To celebrate him fitly, neither swerve</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To phrase unkempt, nor pass discretion’s brink,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With him so statue-like in sad reserve,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So diffident to claim, so forward to deserve!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor need I shun due influence of his fame</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who, mortal among mortals, seemed as now</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The equestrian shape with unimpassioned brow,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That paces silent on through vistas of acclaim.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>What figure more immovably august</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than that grave strength so patient and so pure,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Calm in good fortune, when it wavered, sure,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That mind serene, impenetrably just,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Modelled on classic lines so simple they endure?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That soul so softly radiant and so white</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The track it left seems less of fire than light,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cold but to such as love distemperature?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And if pure light, as some deem, be the force</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That drives rejoicing planets on their course,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why for his power benign seek an impurer source?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His was the true enthusiasm that burns long,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Domestically bright,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fed from itself and shy of human sight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The hidden force that makes a lifetime strong,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And not the short-lived fuel of a song.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Passionless, say you? What is passion for</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But to sublime our natures and control,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To front heroic toils with late return,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or none, or such as shames the conqueror?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That fire was fed with substance of the soul</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And not with holiday stubble, that could burn,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unpraised of men who after bonfires run,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Through seven slow years of unadvancing war,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Equal when fields were lost or fields were won,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With breath of popular applause or blame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor fanned nor damped, unquenchably the same,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too inward to be reached by flaws of idle fame.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Soldier and statesman, rarest unison;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>High-poised example of great duties done</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Simply as breathing, a world’s honors worn</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As life’s indifferent gifts to all men born;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dumb for himself, unless it were to God,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But for his barefoot soldiers eloquent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tramping the snow to coral where they trod,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Held by his awe in hollow-eyed content;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Modest, yet firm as Nature’s self; unblamed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Save by the men his nobler temper shamed;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Never seduced through show of present good</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By other than unsetting lights to steer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>New-trimmed in Heaven, nor than his steadfast mood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More steadfast, far from rashness as from fear;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Rigid, but with himself first, grasping still</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In swerveless poise the wave-beat helm of will;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not honored then or now because he wooed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The popular voice, but that he still withstood;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Broad-minded, higher-souled, there is but one</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who was all this and ours, and all men’s⁠—<b>Washington</b>.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>4.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Minds strong by fits, irregularly great,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That flash and darken like revolving lights,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Catch more the vulgar eye unschooled to wait</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On the long curve of patient days and nights</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bounding a whole life to the circle fair</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of orbed fulfilment; and this balanced soul,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So simple in its grandeur, coldly bare</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of draperies theatric, standing there</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In perfect symmetry of self-control,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seems not so great at first, but greater grows</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Still as we look, and by experience learn</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How grand this quiet is, how nobly stern</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The discipline that wrought through life-long throes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That energetic passion of repose.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>5.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>A nature too decorous and severe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too self-respectful in its griefs and joys,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For ardent girls and boys</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who find no genius in a mind so clear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That its grave depths seem obvious and near,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor a soul great that made so little noise.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They feel no force in that calm-cadenced phrase,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The habitual full-dress of his well-bred mind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That seems to pace the minuet’s courtly maze</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And tell of ampler leisures, roomier length of days,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His firm-based brain, to self so little kind</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That no tumultuary blood could blind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Formed to control men, not amaze,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Looms not like those that borrow height of haze:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It was a world of statelier movement then</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than this we fret in, he a denizen</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of that ideal Rome that made a man for men.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The longer on this earth we live</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And weigh the various Qualities of men,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seeing how most are fugitive,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or fitful gifts, at best, of now and then,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wind-wavered corpse-lights, daughters of the fen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The more we feel the high stern-featured beauty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of plain devotedness to duty,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Steadfast and still, nor paid with mortal praise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But finding amplest recompense</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For life’s ungarlanded expense</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In work done squarely and unwasted days.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For this we honor him, that he could know</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How sweet the service and how free</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of her, God’s eldest daughter here below,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And choose in meanest raiment which was she.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Placid completeness, life without a fall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From faith or highest aims, truth’s breachless wall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Surely if any fame can bear the touch,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His will say ‘Here!’ at the last trumpet’s call,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The unexpressive man whose life expressed so much.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Never to see a nation born</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hath been given to mortal man,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unless to those who, on that summer morn,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Gazed silent when the great Virginian</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unsheathed the sword whose fatal flash</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shot union through the incoherent clash</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of our loose atoms, crystallizing them</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Around a single will’s unpliant stem,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And making purpose of emotion rash.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Out of that scabbard sprang, as from its womb,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nebulous at first but hardening to a star.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Through mutual share of sunburst and of gloom,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The common faith that made us what we are.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>That lifted blade transformed our jangling clans,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till then provincial, to Americans,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And made a unity of wildering plans;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here was the doom fixed: here is marked the date</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When this New World awoke to man’s estate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Burnt its last ship and ceased to look behind:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor thoughtless was the choice; no love or hate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Could from its poise move that deliberate mind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Weighing between too early and too late,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Those pitfalls of the man refused by Fate:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His was the impartial vision of the great</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who see not as they wish, but as they find.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He saw the dangers of defeat, nor less</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The incomputable perils of success;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The sacred past thrown by, an empty rind;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The future, cloud-land, snare of prophets blind;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The waste of war, the ignominy of peace;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On either hand a sullen rear of woes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose garnered lightnings none could guess,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Piling its thunder-heads and muttering ‘Cease!’</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet drew not back his hand, but gravely chose</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The seeming-desperate task whence our new nation rose.</span>
						</p>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>A noble choice and of immortal seed!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor deem that acts heroic wait on chance</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or easy were as in a boy’s romance;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The man’s whole life preludes the single deed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That shall decide if his inheritance</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be with the sifted few of matchless breed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Our race’s sap and sustenance,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or with the unmotived herd that only sleep and feed.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Choice seems a thing indifferent: thus or so,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What matters it? The Fates with mocking face</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Look on inexorable, nor seem to know</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where the lot lurks that gives life’s foremost place.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet Duty’s leaden casket holds it still,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And but two ways are offered to our will,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Toil with rare triumph, ease with safe disgrace,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The problem still for us and all of human race.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He chose, as men choose, where most danger showed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor ever faltered ’neath the load</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of petty cares, that gall great hearts the most,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But kept right on the strenuous up-hill road,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Strong to the end, above complaint or boast:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The popular tempest on his rock-mailed coast</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wasted its wind-borne spray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The noisy marvel of a day;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His soul sate still in its unstormed abode.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Virginia gave us this imperial man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cast in the massive mould</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of those high-statured ages old</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which into grander forms our mortal metal ran;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She gave us this unblemished gentleman:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What shall we give her back but love and praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in the dear old unestrangèd days</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the inevitable wrong began?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mother of States and undiminished men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou gavest us a country, giving him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we owe alway what we owed thee then:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The boon thou wouldst have snatched from us agen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shines as before with no abatement dim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A great man’s memory is the only thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With influence to outlast the present whim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bind us as when here he knit our golden ring.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All of him that was subject to the hours</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lies in thy soil and makes it part of ours:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Across more recent graves,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where unresentful Nature waves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her pennons o’er the shot-ploughed sod,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Proclaiming the sweet Truce of God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We from this consecrated plain stretch out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our hands as free from afterthought or doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As here the united North</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poured her embrownèd manhood forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In welcome of our savior and thy son.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through battle we have better learned thy worth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The long-breathed valor and undaunted will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, like his own, the day’s disaster done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could, safe in manhood, suffer and be still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both thine and ours the victory hardly won;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If ever with distempered voice or pen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We have misdeemed thee, here we take it back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the dead of both don common black.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be to us evermore as thou wast then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As we forget thou hast not always been,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mother of States and unpolluted men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Virginia, fitly named from England’s manly queen!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">An Ode</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">For the Fourth of July, 1876</p>
				</hgroup>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Entranced I saw a vision in the cloud</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That loitered dreaming in yon sunset sky,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Full of fair shapes, half creatures of the eye,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Half chance-evoked by the wind’s fantasy</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In golden mist, an ever-shifting crowd:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There, ‘mid unreal forms that came and went</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In air-spun robes, of evanescent dye,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A woman’s semblance shone preeminent;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not armed like Pallas, not like Hera proud,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, as on household diligence intent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beside her visionary wheel she bent</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like Aretë or Bertha, nor than they</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Less queenly in her port; about her knee</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Glad children clustered confident in play:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Placid her pose, the calm of energy;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And over her broad brow in many a round</span>
							<br/>
							<span>(That loosened would have gilt her garment’s hem),</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Succinct, as toil prescribes, the hair was wound</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In lustrous coils, a natural diadem.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The cloud changed shape, obsequious to the whim</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of some transmuting influence felt in me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, looking now, a wolf I seemed to see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Limned in that vapor, gaunt and hunger-bold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Threatening her charge; resolve in every limb,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Erect she flamed in mail of sun-wove gold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Penthesilea’s self for battle dight;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>One arm uplifted braced a flickering spear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And one her adamantine shield made light;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her face, helm-shadowed, grew a thing to fear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And her fierce eyes, by danger challenged, took</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her trident-sceptred mother’s dauntless look.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>‘I know thee now, O goddess-born!’ I cried,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And turned with loftier brow and firmer stride;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For in that spectral cloud-work I had seen</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her image, bodied forth by love and pride,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The fearless, the benign, the mother-eyed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The fairer world’s toil-consecrated queen.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>What shape by exile dreamed elates the mind</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like hers whose hand, a fortress of the poor,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No blood in vengeance spilt, though lawful, stains?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who never turned a suppliant from her door?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose conquests are the gains of all mankind?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To-day her thanks shall fly on every wind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unstinted, unrebuked, from shore to shore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>One love, one hope, and not a doubt behind!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cannon to cannon shall repeat her praise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Banner to banner flap it forth in flame;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her children shall rise up to bless her name,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And wish her harmless length of days,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The mighty mother of a mighty brood,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Blessed in all tongues and dear to every blood,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The beautiful, the strong, and, best of all, the good.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Seven years long was the bow</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of battle bent, and the heightening</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Storm-heaps convulsed with the throe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of their uncontainable lightning;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seven years long heard the sea</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Crash of navies and wave-borne thunder;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then drifted the cloud-rack a-lee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And new stars were seen, a world’s wonder;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Each by her sisters made bright,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All binding all to their stations,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cluster of manifold light</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Startling the old constellations:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Men looked up and grew pale:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was it a comet or star,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Omen of blessing or bale.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hung o’er the ocean afar?</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>4.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Stormy the day of her birth:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was she not born of the strong.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She, the last ripeness of earth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beautiful, prophesied long?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stormy the days of her prime:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hers are the pulses that beat</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Higher for perils sublime,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Making them fawn at her feet.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was she not born of the strong?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was she not born of the wise?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Daring and counsel belong</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of right to her confident eyes:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Human and motherly they,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Careless of station or race:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hearken! her children to-day</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shout for the joy of her face.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>No praises of the past are hers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No fanes by hallowing time caressed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No broken arch that ministers</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To Time’s sad instinct in the breast;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She has not gathered from the years</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Grandeur of tragedies and tears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor from long leisure the unrest</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That finds repose in forms of classic grace:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These may delight the coming race</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who haply shall not count it to our crime</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That we who fain would sing are here before our time.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She also hath her monuments;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not such as stand decrepitly resigned</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To ruin-mark the path of dead events</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That left no seed of better days behind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The tourist’s pensioners that show their scars</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And maunder of forgotten wars;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She builds not on the ground, but in the mind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her open-hearted palaces</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For larger-thoughted men with heaven and earth at ease:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her march the plump mow marks, the sleepless wheel,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The golden sheaf, the self-swayed commonweal;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The happy homesteads hid in orchard trees</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose sacrificial smokes through peaceful air</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Rise lost in heaven, the household’s silent prayer;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What architect hath bettered these?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With softened eye the westward traveller sees</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A thousand miles of neighbors side by side,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Holding by toil-won titles fresh from God</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The lands no serf or seigneur ever trod,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With manhood latent in the very sod,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where the long billow of the wheatfield’s tide</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Flows to the sky across the prairie wide,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A sweeter vision than the castled Rhine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Kindly with thoughts of Ruth and Bible-days benign.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>O ancient commonwealths, that we revere</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Haply because we could not know you near,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Your deeds like statues down the aisles of Time</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shine peerless in memorial calm sublime,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Athens is a trumpet still, and Rome;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet which of your achievements is not foam</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Weighed with this one of hers (below you far</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In fame, and born beneath a milder star),</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That to Earth’s orphans, far as curves the dome</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of death-deaf sky, the bounteous West means home,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With dear precedency of natural ties</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That stretch from roof to roof and make men gently wise?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And if the nobler passions wane,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Distorted to base use, if the near goal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of insubstantial gain</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tempt from the proper race-course of the soul</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That crowns their patient breath</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose feet, song-sandalled, are too fleet for Death,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet may she claim one privilege urbane</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And haply first upon the civic roll,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That none can breathe her air nor grow humane.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Oh, better far the briefest hour</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Athens self-consumed, whose plastic power</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hid Beauty safe from Death in words or stone;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Rome, fair quarry where those eagles crowd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose fulgurous vans about the world had blown</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Triumphant storm and seeds of polity;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Venice, fading o’er her shipless sea,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Last iridescence of a sunset cloud;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than this inert prosperity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This bovine comfort in the sense alone!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet art came slowly even to such as those.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whom no past genius cheated of their own</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With prudence of o’ermastering precedent;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Petal by petal spreads the perfect rose,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Secure of the divine event;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And only children rend the bud half-blown</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To forestall Nature in her calm intent:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Time hath a quiver full of purposes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which miss not of their aim, to us unknown,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And brings about the impossible with ease:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Haply for us the ideal dawn shall break</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From where in legend-tinted line</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The peaks of Hellas drink the morning’s wine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To tremble on our lids with mystic sign</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till the drowsed ichor in our veins awake</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And set our pulse in time with moods divine:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Long the day lingered in its sea-fringed nest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then touched the Tuscan hills with golden lance</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And paused; then on to Spain and France</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The splendor flew, and Albion’s misty crest:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall Ocean bar him from his destined West?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or are we, then, arrived too late,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Doomed with the rest to grope disconsolate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Foreclosed of Beauty by our modern date?</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Poets, as their heads grow gray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Look from too far behind the eyes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too long-experienced to be wise</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In guileless youth’s diviner way;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Life sings not now, but prophesies;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Time’s shadows they no more behold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, under them, the riddle old</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That mocks, bewilders, and defies:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In childhood’s face the seed of shame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In the green tree an ambushed flame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In Phosphor a vaunt-guard of Night,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They, though against their will, divine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And dread the care-dispelling wine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stored from the Muse’s mintage bright,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By age imbued with second-sight.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From Faith’s own eyelids there peeps out,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Even as they look, the leer of doubt;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The festal wreath their fancy loads</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With care that whispers and forebodes:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor this our triumph-day can blunt Megæra’s goads.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Murmur of many voices in the air</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Denounces us degenerate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unfaithful guardians of a noble fate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And prompts indifference or despair:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is this the country that we dreamed in youth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where wisdom and not numbers should have weight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seed-field of simpler manners, braver truth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where shams should cease to dominate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In household, church, and state?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is this Atlantis? This the unpoisoned soil,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sea-whelmed for ages and recovered late,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where parasitic greed no more should coil</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bound Freedom’s stem to bend awry and blight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What grew so fair, sole plant of love and light?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who sit where once in crowned seclusion sate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The long-proved athletes of debate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Trained from their youth, as none thinks needful now?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is this debating club where boys dispute,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And wrangle o’er their stolen fruit,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Senate, erewhile cloister of the few,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where Clay once flashed and Webster’s cloudy brow</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Brooded those bolts of thought that all the horizon knew?</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Oh, as this pensive moonlight blurs my pines,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here while I sit and meditate these lines,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To gray-green dreams of what they are by day,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So would some light, not reason’s sharp-edged ray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Trance me in moonshine as before the flight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of years had won me this unwelcome right</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To see things as they are, or shall he soon,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In the frank prose of undissembling noon!</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>4.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Back to my breast, ungrateful sigh!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whoever fails, whoever errs,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The penalty be ours, not hers!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The present still seems vulgar, seen too nigh;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The golden age is still the age that’s past:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I ask no drowsy opiate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To dull my vision of that only state</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Founded on faith in man, and therefore sure to last.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For, O my country, touched by thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The gray hairs gather back their gold;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thy thought sets all my pulses free;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The heart refuses to be old;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The love is all that I can see.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not to thy natal-day belong</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Time’s prudent doubt or age’s wrong,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But gifts of gratitude and song:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unsummoned crowd the thankful words,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As sap in spring-time floods the tree.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Foreboding the return of birds,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For all that thou hast been to me!</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>1.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Flawless his heart and tempered to the core</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who, beckoned by the forward-leaning wave,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>First left behind him the firm-footed shore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, urged by every nerve of sail and oar,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Steered for the Unknown which gods to mortals gave.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of thought and action the mysterious door,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bugbear of fools, a summons to the brave:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Strength found he in the unsympathizing sun,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And strange stars from beneath the horizon won,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And the dumb ocean pitilessly grave:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>High-hearted surely he;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But bolder they who first off-cast</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their moorings from the habitable Past</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And ventured chartless on the sea</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of storm-engendering Liberty:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For all earth’s width of waters is a span,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And their convulsed existence mere repose,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Matched with the unstable heart of man,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shoreless in wants, mist-girt in all it knows,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Open to every wind of sect or clan,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And sudden-passionate in ebbs and flows.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>2.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>They steered by stars the elder shipmen knew,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And laid their courses where the currents draw</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of ancient wisdom channelled deep in law.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The undaunted few</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who changed the Old World for the New,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And more devoutly prized</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than all perfection theorized</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The more imperfect that had roots and grew.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They founded deep and well,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Those danger-chosen chiefs of men</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who still believed in Heaven and Hell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor hoped to find a spell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In some fine flourish of a pen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To make a better man</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than long-considering Nature will or can,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Secure against his own mistakes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Content with what life gives or takes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And acting still on some fore-ordered plan,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A cog of iron in an iron wheel,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too nicely poised to think or feel,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dumb motor in a clock-like commonweal.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They wasted not their brain in schemes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of what man might be in some bubble-sphere,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As if he must be other than he seems</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Because he was not what he should be here,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Postponing Time’s slow proof to petulant dreams:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet herein they were great</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beyond the incredulous lawgivers of yore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And wiser than the wisdom of the shelf,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That they conceived a deeper-rooted state,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of hardier growth, alive from rind to core,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By making man sole sponsor of himself.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p>3.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>God of our fathers, Thou who wast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Art, and shalt be when those eye-wise who flout</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thy secret presence shall be lost</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In the great light that dazzles them to doubt,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We, sprung from loins of stalwart men</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose strength was in their trust</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That Thou woudst make thy dwelling in their dust</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And walk with those a fellow-citizen</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who build a city of the just,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We, who believe Life’s bases rest</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beyond the probe of chemic test,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Still, like our fathers, feel Thee near,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sure that, while lasts the immutable decree,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The land to Human Nature dear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall not be unbeloved of Thee.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="agassiz" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Agassiz</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dicesti <i>egli ebbe?</i> non viv’ egli ancora?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Non fiere gli occhi suoi lo dolce lome?</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The electric nerve, whose instantaneous thrill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makes next-door gossips of the antipodes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Confutes poor Hope’s last fallacy of ease⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The distance that divided her from ill:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earth sentient seems again as when of old</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The horny foot of Pan</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stamped, and the conscious horror ran</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath men’s feet through all her fibres cold:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Space’s blue walls are mined; we feel the throe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From underground of our night-mantled foe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The flame-winged feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Trade’s new Mercury, that dry-shod run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through briny abysses dreamless of the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Are mercilessly fleet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And at a bound annihilate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ocean’s prerogative of short reprieve;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Surely ill news might wait,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And man be patient of delay to grieve:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Letters have sympathies</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And tell-tale faces that reveal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To senses finer than the eyes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their errand’s purport ere we break the seal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They wind a sorrow round with circumstance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stay its feet, nor all unwarned displace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The veil that darkened from our sidelong glance</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The inexorable face:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But now Fate stuns as with a mace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The savage of the skies, that men have caught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And some scant use of language taught,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Tells only what he must⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The steel-cold fact in one laconic thrust.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So thought I, as, with vague, mechanic eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I scanned the festering news we half despise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Yet scramble for no less,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And read of public scandal, private fraud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crime flaunting scot-free while the mob applaud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Office made vile to bribe unworthiness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And all the unwholesome mess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Land of Honest Abraham serves of late</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To teach the Old World how to wait,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">When suddenly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As happens if the brain, from overweight</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Of blood, infect the eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Three tiny words grew lurid as I read,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And reeled commingling: <i>Agassiz is dead</i>.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when, beneath the street’s familiar jar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An earthquake’s alien omen rumbles far,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men listen and forebode, I hung my head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And strove the present to recall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if the blow that stunned were yet to fall.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Uprooted is our mountain oak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That promised long security of shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And brooding-place for many a wingèd thought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Not by Time’s softly cadenced stroke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pauses of relenting pity stayed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ere a root seemed sapt, a bough decayed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From sudden ambush by the whirlwind caught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in his broad maturity betrayed!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Well might I, as of old, appeal to you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">O mountains, woods, and streams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To help us mourn him, for ye loved him too;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But simpler moods befit our modern themes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And no less perfect birth of nature can,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though they yearn tow’rd him, sympathize with man.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save as dumb fellow-prisoners through a wall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Answer ye rather to my call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strong poets of a more unconscious day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Nature spake nor sought nice reasons why,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too much for softer arts forgotten since</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That teach our forthright tongue to lisp and mince,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And drown in music the heart’s bitter cry!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lead me some steps in your directer way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Teach me those words that strike a solid root</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Within the ears of men;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye chiefly, virile both to think and feel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep-chested Chapman and firm-footed Ben,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he was masculine from head to heel.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, let himself stand undiminished by</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With those clear parts of him that will not die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself from out the recent dark I claim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hear, and, if I flatter him, to blame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To show himself, as still I seem to see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mortal, built upon the antique plan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brimful of lusty blood as ever ran,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And taking life as simply as a tree!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To claim my foiled good-by let him appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Large-limbed and human as I saw him near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loosed from the stiffening uniform of fame:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let me treat him largely; I should fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(If with too prying lens I chanced to err,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mistaking catalogue for character,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wise forefinger raised in smiling blame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor would I scant him with judicial breath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn mere critic in an epitaph;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I choose the wheat, incurious of the chaff</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That swells fame living, chokes it after death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And would but memorize the shining half</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his large nature that was turned to me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fain had I joined with those that honored him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With eyes that darkened because his were dim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now been silent: but it might not be.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In some the genius is a thing apart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A pillared hermit of the brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hoarding with incommunicable art</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Its intellectual gain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Man’s web of circumstance and fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">They from their perch of self observe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Indifferent as the figures on a slate</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Are to the planet’s sun-swung curve</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Whose bright returns they calculate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Their nice adjustment, part to part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were shaken from its serviceable mood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By unpremeditated stirs of heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Or jar of human neighborhood:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some find their natural selves, and only then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In furloughs of divine escape from men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when, by that brief ecstasy left bare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Driven by some instinct of desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They wander worldward, ’tis to blink and stare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like wild things of the wood about a fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dazed by the social glow they cannot share;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">His nature brooked no lonely lair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But basked and bourgeoned in co-partnery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Companionship, and open-windowed glee:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He knew, for he had tried,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Those speculative heights that lure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The unpractised foot, impatient of a guide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Tow’rd ether too attenuately pure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For sweet unconscious breath, though dear to pride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But better loved the foothold sure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of paths that wind by old abodes of men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who hope at last the churchyard’s peace secure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And follow time-worn rules, that them suffice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Learned from their sires, traditionally wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Careful of honest custom’s how and when;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His mind, too brave to look on Truth askance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more those habitudes of faith could share,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, tinged with sweetness of the old Swiss manse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lingered around them still and fain would spare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patient to spy a sullen egg for weeks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enigma of creation to surprise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His truer instinct sought the life that speaks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without a mystery from kindly eyes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In no self-spun cocoon of prudence wound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He by the touch of men was best inspired,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And caught his native greatness at rebound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From generosities itself had fired;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then how the heat through every fibre ran,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Felt in the gathering presence of the man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While the apt word and gesture came unbid!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Virtues and faults it to one metal wrought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Fined all his blood to thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ran the molten man in all he said or did.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Tully’s rules and all Quintilian’s too</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He by the light of listening faces knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his rapt audience all unconscious lent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their own roused force to make him eloquent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Persuasion fondled in his look and tone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our speech (with strangers prudish) he could bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find new charm in accents not her own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her coy constraints and icy hindrances</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Melted upon his lips to natural ease,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As a brook’s fetters swell the dance of spring.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor yet all sweetness: not in vain he wore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor in the sheath of ceremony, controlled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By velvet courtesy or caution cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sword of honest anger prized of old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">But, with two-handed wrath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If baseness or pretension crossed his path,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Struck once nor needed to strike more.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">His magic was not far to seek.⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He was so human! Whether strong or weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Far from his kind he neither sank nor soared,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sate an equal guest at every board:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No beggar ever felt him condescend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No prince presume; for still himself he bare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At manhood’s simple level, and where’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He met a stranger, there he left a friend.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How large an aspect! nobly un-severe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With freshness round him of Olympian cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like visits of those earthly gods he came;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His look, wherever its good-fortune fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doubled the feast without a miracle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on the hearthstone danced a happier flame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Philemon’s crabbed vintage grew benign;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amphitryon’s gold-juice humanized to wine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i4">The garrulous memories</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gather again from all their far-flown nooks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Singly at first, and then by twos and threes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then in a throng innumerable, as the rooks</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Thicken their twilight files</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tow’rd Tintern’s gray repose of roofless aisles:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Once more I see him at the table’s head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Saturday her monthly banquet spread</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">To scholars, poets, wits,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All choice, some famous, loving things, not names,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so without a twinge at others’ fames;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such company as wisest moods befits,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet with no pedant blindness to the worth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Of undeliberate mirth,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Natures benignly mixed of air and earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now with the stars and now with equal zest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tracing the eccentric orbit of a jest.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I see in vision the warm-lighted hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The living and the dead I see again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And but my chair is empty; ‘mid them all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis I that seem the dead: they all remain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immortal, changeless creatures of the brain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wellnigh I doubt which world is real most,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sense or spirit to the truly sane;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this abstraction it were light to deem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Myself the figment of some stronger dream;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They are the real things, and I the ghost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That glide unhindered through the solid door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vainly for recognition seek from chair to chair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And strive to speak and am but futile air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As truly most of us are little more.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Him most I see whom we most dearly miss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The latest parted thence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His features poised in genial armistice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And armed neutrality of self-defence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath the forehead’s walled preeminence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While Tyro, plucking facts with careless reach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Settles off-hand our human how and whence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The long-trained veteran scarcely wincing hears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The infallible strategy of volunteers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Making through Nature’s walls its easy breach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seems to learn where he alone could teach.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ample and ruddy, the board’s end he fills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he our fireside were, our light and heat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Centre where minds diverse and various skills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Find their warm nook and stretch unhampered feet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see the firm benignity of face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide-smiling champaign, without tameness sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mass Teutonic toned to Gallic grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The eyes whose sunshine runs before the lips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While Holmes’s rockets, curve their long ellipse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And burst in seeds of fire that burst again</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">To drop in scintillating rain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">There too the face half-rustic, half-divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Self-poised, sagacious, freaked with humor fine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of him who taught us not to mow and mope</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">About our fancied selves, but seek our scope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Nature’s world and Man’s, nor fade to hollow trope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Content with our New World and timely bold</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To challenge the o’ermastery of the Old;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Listening with eyes averse I see him sit</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Pricked with the cider of the Judge’s wit</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(Ripe-hearted homebrew, fresh and fresh again),</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">While the wise nose’s firm-built aquiline</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Curves sharper to restrain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The merriment whose most unruly moods</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Pass not the dumb laugh learned in listening woods</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Of silence-shedding pine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hard by is he whose art’s consoling spell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hath given both worlds a whiff of asphodel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His look still vernal ‘mid the wintry ring</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of petals that remember, not foretell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The paler primrose of a second spring.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And more there are: but other forms arise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And seen as clear, albeit with dimmer eyes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">First he from sympathy still held apart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By shrinking over-eagerness of heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Cloud charged with searching fire, whose shadow’s sweep</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Heightened mean things with sense of brooding ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And steeped in doom familiar field and hill⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">New England’s poet, soul reserved and deep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">November nature with a name of May,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom high o’er Concord plains we laid to sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">While the orchards mocked us in their white array</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And building robins wondered at our tears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Snatched in his prime, the shape august</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That should have stood unbent ’neath fourscore years,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The noble head, the eyes of furtive trust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">All gone to speechless dust.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And he our passing guest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shy nature, too, and stung with life’s unrest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom we too briefly had but could not hold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who brought ripe Oxford’s culture to our board,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The Past’s incalculable hoard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mellowed by scutcheoned panes in cloisters old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Seclusions ivy-hushed, and pavements sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With immemorial lisp of musing feet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Young head time-tonsured smoother than a friar’s,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Boy face, but grave with answerless desires,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Poet in all that poets have of best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But foiled with riddles dark and cloudy aims,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Who now hath found sure rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Not by still Isis or historic Thames,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor by the Charles he tried to love with me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But, not misplaced, by Arno’s hallowed brim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor scorned by Santa Croce’s neighboring fames,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Haply not mindless, wheresoe’er he be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of violets that to-day I scattered over him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">He, too, is there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">After the good centurion fitly named,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom learning dulled not, nor convention tamed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shaking with burly mirth his hyacinthine hair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Our hearty Grecian of Homeric ways,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still found the surer friend where least he hoped the praise.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Yea truly, as the sallowing years</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fall from us faster, like frost-loosened leaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Pushed by the misty touch of shortening days,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And that unwakened winter nears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Tis the void chair our surest guest receives,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Tis lips long cold that give the warmest kiss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Tis the lost voice comes oftenest to our ears;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We count our rosary by the beads we miss:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To me, at least, it seemeth so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An exile in the land once found divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">While my starved fire burns low,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And homeless winds at the loose casement whine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shrill ditties of the snow-roofed Apennine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Now forth into the darkness all are gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But memory, still unsated, follows on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Retracing step by step our homeward walk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With many a laugh among our serious talk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Across the bridge where, on the dimpling tide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The long red streamers from the windows glide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Or the dim western moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rocks her skiff’s image on the broad lagoon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Boston shows a soft Venetian side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In that Arcadian light when roof and tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hard prose by daylight, dream in Italy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or haply in the sky’s cold chambers wide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shivered the winter stars, while all below,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if an end were come of human ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world was wrapt in innocence of snow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the cast-iron bay was blind and still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These were our poetry; in him perhaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Science had barred the gate that lets in dream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he would rather count the perch and bream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than with the current’s idle fancy lapse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet he had the poet’s open eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That takes a frank delight in all it sees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor was earth voiceless, nor the mystic sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To him the life-long friend of fields and trees:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then came the prose of the suburban street,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its silence deepened by our echoing feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And converse such as rambling hazard finds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then he who many cities knew and many minds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And men once world-noised, now mere Ossian forms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of misty memory, bade them live anew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when they shared earth’s manifold delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In shape, in gait, in voice, in gesture true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, with an accent heightening as he warms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would stop forgetful of the shortening night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drop my confining arm, and pour profuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much worldly wisdom kept for others’ use,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not for his own, for he was rash and free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His purse or knowledge all men’s, like the sea.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still can I hear his voice’s shrilling might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(With pauses broken, while the fitful spark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He blew more hotly rounded on the dark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hint his features with a Rembrandt light)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Call Oken back, or Humboldt, or Lamarck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Cuvier’s taller shade, and many more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom he had seen, or knew from others’ sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make them men to me as ne’er before:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not seldom, as the undeadened fibre stirred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of noble friendships knit beyond the sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>German or French thrust by the lagging word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a good leash of mother-tongues had he.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At last, arrived at where our paths divide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Good night!’ and, ere the distance grew too wide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Good night!’ again; and now with cheated ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I half hear his who mine shall never hear.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Sometimes it seemed as if New England air</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For his large lungs too parsimonious were,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As if those empty rooms of dogma drear</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where the ghost shivers of a faith austere</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Counting the horns o’er of the Beast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Still scaring those whose faith to it is least,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As if those snaps o’ th’ moral atmosphere</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That sharpen all the needles of the East,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Had been to him like death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Accustomed to draw Europe’s freer breath</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">In a more stable element;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nay, even our landscape, half the year morose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Our practical horizon, grimly pent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Our air, sincere of ceremonious haze,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Forcing hard outlines mercilessly close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Our social monotone of level days,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Might make our best seem banishment;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">But it was nothing so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Haply this instinct might divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Beneath our drift of puritanic snow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The marvel sensitive and fine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of sanguinaria over-rash to blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And trust its shyness to an air malign;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Well might he prize truth’s warranty and pledge</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the grim outcrop of our granite edge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or Hebrew fervor flashing forth at need</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the gaunt sons of Calvin’s iron breed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As prompt to give as skilled to win and keep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But, though such intuitions might not cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet life was good to him, and, there or here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With that sufficing joy, the day was never cheap;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thereto his mind was its own ample sphere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And, like those buildings great that through the year</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Carry one temperature, his nature large</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Made its own climate, nor could any marge</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Traced by convention stay him from his bent:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He had a habitude of mountain air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He brought wide outlook where he went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And could on sunny uplands dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of prospect sweeter than the pastures fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">High-hung of viny Neufchâtel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Nor, surely, did he miss</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Some pale, imaginary bliss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of earlier sights whose inner landscape still was Swiss.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">I cannot think he wished so soon to die</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With all his senses full of eager heat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And rosy years that stood expectant by</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To buckle the winged sandals on their feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He that was friends with Earth, and all her sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Took with both hands unsparingly:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Truly this life is precious to the root,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And good the feel of grass beneath the foot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To lie in buttercups and clover-bloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Tenants in common with the bees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And watch the white clouds drift through gulfs of trees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is better than long waiting in the tomb;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Only once more to feel the coming spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As the birds feel it, when it bids them sing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Only once more to see the moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Through leaf-fringed abbey-arches of the elms</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Curve her mild sickle in the West</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sweet with the breath of haycocks, were a boon</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Worth any promise of soothsayer realms</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or casual hope of being elsewhere blest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To take December by the beard</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And crush the creaking snow with springy foot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">While overhead the North’s dumb streamers shoot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till Winter fawn upon the cheek endeared,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Then the long evening-ends</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Lingered by cosy chimney-nooks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With high companionship of books</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Or slippered talk of friends</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And sweet habitual looks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is better than to stop the ears with dust:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too soon the spectre comes to say, ‘Thou must!’</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">When toil-crooked hands are crost upon the breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">They comfort us with sense of rest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They must be glad to lie forever still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Their work is ended with their day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another fills their room; ‘t is the World’s ancient way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Whether for good or ill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But the deft spinners of the brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who love each added day and find it gain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Them overtakes the doom</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To snap the half-grown flower upon the loom</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(Trophy that was to be of life long pain),</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The thread no other skill can ever knit again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">’Twas so with him, for he was glad to live,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Twas doubly so, for he left work begun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Could not this eagerness of Fate forgive</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Till all the allotted flax were spun?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It matters not; for, go at night or noon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A friend, whene’er he dies, has died too soon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And, once we hear the hopeless <i>He is dead,</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">So far as flesh hath knowledge, all is said.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">I seem to see the black procession go:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That crawling prose of death too well I know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The vulgar paraphrase of glorious woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I see it wind through that unsightly grove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Once beautiful, but long defaced</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With granite permanence of cockney taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all those grim disfigurements we love:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There, then, we leave him: Him? such costly waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nature rebels at: and it is not true</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of those most precious parts of him we knew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Could we be conscious but as dreamers be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Twere sweet to leave this shifting life of tents</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sunk in the changeless calm of Deity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nay, to be mingled with the elements,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The fellow-servants of creative powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Partaker in the solemn year’s events,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To share the work of busy-fingered hours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To be night’s silent almoner of dew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To rise again in plants and breathe and grow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To stream as tides the ocean caverns through,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or with the rapture of great winds to blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">About earth’s shaken coignes, were not a fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To leave us all-disconsolate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even endless slumber in the sweetening sod</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of charitable earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That takes out all our mortal stains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes us cleanlier neighbors of the clod,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Methinks were better worth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than the poor fruit of most men’s wakeful pains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The heart’s insatiable ache:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But such was not his faith,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor mine: it may be he had trod</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Outside the plain old path of <i>God thus spake</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But God to him was very God</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And not a visionary wraith</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Skulking in murky corners of the mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And he was sure to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Somehow, somewhere, imperishable as He,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not with His essence mystically combined,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As some high spirits long, but whole and free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A perfected and conscious Agassiz.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And such I figure him: the wise of old</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Welcome and own him of their peaceful fold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Not truly with the guild enrolled</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of him who seeking inward guessed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Diviner riddles than the rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And groping in the darks of thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Touched the Great Hand and knew it not;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Rather he shares the daily light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From reason’s charier fountains won,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his great chief, the slow-paced Stagyrite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Cuvier clasps once more his long-lost son.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p>2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The shape erect is prone: forever stilled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The winning tongue; the forehead’s high-piled heap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cairn which every science helped to build,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unvalued will its golden secrets keep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He knows at last if Life or Death be best:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherever he be flown, whatever vest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The being hath put on which lately here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many-friended was, so full of cheer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make men feel the Seeker’s noble zest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We have not lost him all; he is not gone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the dumb herd of them that wholly die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The beauty of his better self lives on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In minds he touched with fire, in many an eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He trained to Truth’s exact severity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He was a Teacher: why be grieved for him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose living word still stimulates the air?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In endless file shall loving scholars come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The glow of his transmitted touch to share,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And trace his features with an eye less dim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than ours whose sense familiar wont makes dumb.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="to-holmes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Holmes</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On His Seventy-Fifth Birthday</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Dear Wendell, why need count the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since first your genius made me thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If what moved then to smiles or tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or both contending, move me still?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What has the Calendar to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With poets? What Time’s fruitless tooth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gay immortals such as you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose years but emphasize your youth?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One air gave both their lease of breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The same paths lured our boyish feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One earth will hold us safe in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With dust of saints and scholars sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our legends from one source were drawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I scarce distinguish yours from mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <i>don’t</i> we make the Gentiles yawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ‘You remembers?’ o’er our wine!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If I, with too senescent air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Invade your elder memory’s pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You snub me with a pitying ‘Where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were you in the September Gale?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Both stared entranced at Lafayette,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw Jackson dubbed with LL.D.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Cambridge saw not strikes us yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As scarcely worth one’s while to see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ten years my senior, when my name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Harvard’s entrance-book was writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her halls still echoed with the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of you, her poet and her wit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis fifty years from then to now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But your Last Leaf renews its green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though, for the laurels on your brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So thick they crowd), ’tis hardly seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The oriole’s fledglings fifty times</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have flown from our familiar elms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many poets with their rhymes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oblivion’s darkling dust o’erwhelms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The birds are hushed, the poets gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where no harsh critic’s lash can reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still your wingèd brood sing on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all who love our English speech.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, let the foolish records he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That make believe you’re seventy-five:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re the old Wendell still to me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that’s the youngest man alive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gray-blue eyes, I see them still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gallant front with brown o’erhung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shape alert, the wit at will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The phrase that stuck, but never stung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You keep your youth as yon Scotch firs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose gaunt line my horizon hems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though twilight all the lowland blurs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hold sunset in their ruddy stems.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><i>You</i> with the elders? Yes, ’tis true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in no sadly literal sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With elders and coevals too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose verb admits no preterite tense.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Master alike in speech and song</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fame’s great antiseptic⁠—Style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You with the classic few belong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who tempered wisdom with a smile.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Outlive us all! Who else like you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could sift the seedcorn from our chaff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make us with the pen we knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deathless at least in epitaph?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-a-copy-of-omar-khayyam" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In a Copy of Omar Khayyám</h2>
			<p>
				<span>These pearls of thought in Persian gulfs were bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each softly lucent as a rounded moon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The diver Omar plucked them from their bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitzgerald strung them on an English thread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fit rosary for a queen, in shape and hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Contemplation tells her pensive beads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal thoughts, forever old and new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit for a queen? Why, surely then for you!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The moral? Where Doubt’s eddies toss and twirl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faith’s slender shallop till her footing reel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunge: if you find not peace beneath the whirl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groping, you may like Omar grasp a pearl.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-receiving-a-copy-of-mr-austin-dobsons-old-world-idylls" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Receiving a Copy of Mr. Austin Dobson’s ‘Old World Idylls’</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At length arrived, your book I take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To read in for the author’s sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too gray for new sensations grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can charm to Art or Nature known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This torpor from my senses shake?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hush! my parched ears what runnels slake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a thrush gurgling from the brake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has Spring, on all the breezes blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length arrived?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long may you live such songs to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to listen while you wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With skill of late disused, each tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the <i>Lesboum, barbiton</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At mastery, through long finger-ache,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length arrived.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As I read on, what changes steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er me and through, from head to heel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rapier thrusts coat-skirt aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My rough Tweeds bloom to silken pride⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was it laughed? Your hand, Dick Steele!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Down vistas long of clipt <i>charmille</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watteau as Pierrot leads the reel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tabor and pipe the dancers guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I read on.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While in and out the verses wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind-caught robes trim feet reveal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lithe ankles that to music glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chastely and by chance descried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art? Nature? Which do I most feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I read on?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="to-c-f-bradford" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To C. F. Bradford</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On the Gift of a Meerschaum Pipe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The pipe came safe, and welcome too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As anything must be from you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A meerschaum pure, ’twould float as light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she the girls call Amphitrite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixture divine of foam and clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From both it stole the best away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its foam is such as crowns the glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beakers brimmed by Veuve Clicquot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its clay is but congested lymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove chose to make some choicer nymph;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here combined⁠—why, this must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birth of some enchanted sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaped to immortal form, the type</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And very Venus of a pipe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When high I heap it with the weed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Lethe wharf, whose potent seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nicotia, big from Bacchus, bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast upon Virginia’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll think⁠—So fill the fairer bowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wise alembic of thy soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With herbs far-sought that shall distil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not fumes to slacken thought and will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bracing essences that nerve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wait, to dare, to strive, to serve.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When curls the smoke in eddies soft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hangs a shifting dream aloft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gives and takes, though chance-designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The impress of the dreamer’s mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll think⁠—So let the vapors bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Passion, in the heart or head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass off and upward into space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waving farewells of tenderest grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembered in some happier time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blend their beauty with my rhyme.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While slowly o’er its candid bowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The color deepens (as the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That burns in mortals leaves its trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bale or beauty on the face),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll think⁠—So let the essence rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of years consuming make me fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, ’gainst the ills of life profuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steep me in some narcotic juice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if my soul must part with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whiteness which we greenness call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth back, O Fortune, half thy frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make me beautifully brown!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dream-forger, I refill thy cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With reverie’s wasteful pittance up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the fire burns slow away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hiding itself in ashes gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll think⁠—As inward Youth retreats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compelled to spare his wasting heats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Life’s Ash-Wednesday comes about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my head’s gray with fires burnt out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While stays one spark to light the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the last flash of memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill leap to welcome C. F. B.,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sent my favorite pipe to me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bankside" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title">Bankside</h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">(Home of Edmund Quincy)</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">Dedham, May 21, 1877</p>
			</header>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I christened you in happier days, before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These gray forebodings on my brow were seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You are still lovely in your new-leaved green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brimming river soothes his grassy shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bridge is there; the rock with lichens hoar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the same shadows on the water lean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outlasting us. How many graves between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day and this! How many shadows more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darken my heart, their substance from these eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hidden forever! So our world is made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life and death commingled; and the sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outweigh the smiles, in equal balance laid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What compensation? None, save that the Allwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So schools us to love things that cannot fade.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thank God, he saw you last in pomp of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere any leaf had felt the year’s regret;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your latest image in his memory set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fair as when your landscape’s peaceful sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charmed dearer eyes with his to make delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Hope’s long prospect⁠—as if They forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happy, They, the unspeakable Three, whose debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the hawk’s shadow, blots our brightest day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better it is that ye should look so fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slopes that he loved, and ever-murmuring pines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That make a music out of silent air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bloom-heaped orchard-trees in prosperous lines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In you the heart some sweeter hints divines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wiser, than in winter’s dull despair.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Old Friend, farewell! Your kindly door again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I enter, but the master’s hand in mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more clasps welcome, and the temperate wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cheered our long nights, other lips must stain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is unchanged, but I expect in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face alert, the manners free and fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seventy years borne lightly as the pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wears its first down of snow in green disdain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much did he, and much well; yet most of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I prized his skill in leisure and the ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a life flowing full without a plan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For most are idly busy; him I call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice fortunate who knew himself to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learned in those arts that make a gentleman.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor deem he lived unto himself alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His was the public spirit of his sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in those eyes, soft with domestic fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quenchless light of fiercer temper shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time about, the world our shame was blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every wind; his soul would not conspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With selfish men to soothe the mob’s desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Veiling with garlands Moloch’s bloody stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The high-bred instincts of a better day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruled in his blood, when to be citizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rang Roman yet, and a Free People’s sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not the exchequer of impoverished men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor statesmanship with loaded votes to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor public office a tramps’ boosing-ken.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="joseph-winlock" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Joseph Winlock</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Died June 11, 1875</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Shy soul and stalwart, man of patient will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through years one hair’s-breadth on our Dark to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, from the stars he studied not in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had learned their secret to be strong and still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Careless of fames that earth’s tin trumpets fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born under Leo, broad of build and brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While others slept, he watched in that hushed fane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Science, only witness of his skill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden as falls a shooting-star he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But inextinguishable his luminous trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mind and heart of all that knew him well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy man’s doom! To him the Fates were known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of orbs dim hovering on the skirts of space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unprescient, through God’s mercy, of his own!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-to-fanny-alexander" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To Fanny Alexander</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Unconscious as the sunshine, simply sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And generous as that, thou dost not close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself in art, as life were but a rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rumple bee-like with luxurious feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy higher mind therein finds sure retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not from care of common hopes and woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee the dark chamber, thee the unfriended, knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although no babbling crowds thy praise repeat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consummate artist, who life’s landscape bleak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast brimmed with sun to many a clouded eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched to a brighter hue the beggar’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung over orphaned lives a gracious sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traced for eyes, that else would vainly seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair pictures of an angel drawing nigh!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="jeffries-wyman" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Jeffries Wyman</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Died September 4, 1874</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The wisest man could ask no more of Fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to be simple, modest, manly, true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe from the Many, honored by the Few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To count as naught in World, or Church, or State,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, inwardly in secret to be great;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel mysterious Nature ever new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To touch, if not to grasp, her endless clue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn by each discovery how to wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He widened knowledge and escaped the praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wisely taught, because more wise to learn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He toiled for Science, not to draw men’s gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for her lore of self-denial stern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such a man could spring from our decays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fans the soul’s nobler faith until it burn.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-friend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To a Friend</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Who Gave Me a Group of Weeds and Grasses, After a Drawing of Dürer</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>True as the sun’s own work, but more refined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It tells of love behind the artist’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sweet companionships with earth and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summers stored, the sunshine of the mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What peace! Sure, ere you breathe, the fickle wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will break its truce and bend that grass-plume high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarcely yet quiet from the gilded fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flits a more luxurious perch to find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thanks for a pleasure that can never pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A serene moment, deftly caught and kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make immortal summer on my wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he who drew such gladness ever wept?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask rather could he else have seen at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grown in Nature’s mysteries an adept?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="with-an-armchair" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">With an Armchair</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>1.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>About the oak that framed this chair, of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seasons danced their round; delighted wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought music to its boughs; shy woodland things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shared its broad roof, ’neath whose green glooms grown bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovers, more shy than they, their secret told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The resurrection of a thousand springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swelled in its veins, and dim imaginings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teased them, perchance, of life more manifold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such shall it know when its proud arms enclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady Goshawk, musing here at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careless of him who into exile goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, while his gift by those fair limbs is prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through some fine sympathy of nature knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, seas between us, she is still his guest.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>2.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet sometimes, let me dream, the conscious wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A momentary vision may renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him who counts it treasure that he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though but in passing, such a priceless good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like an elder brother, felt his mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifted by the spell that kept her true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid her lightsome compeers, to the few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wear the crown of serious womanhood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were he so happy, think of him as one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in the Louvre or Pitti feels his soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapt by some dead face which, till then unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moves like a memory, and, till life outrun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is vexed with vague misgiving past control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nameless loss and thwarted might-have-been.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="e-g-de-r" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">E. G. de R.</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Why should I seek her spell to decompose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to its source each rill of influence trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That feeds the brimming river of her grace?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The petals numbered but degrade to prose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summer’s triumphant poem of the rose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough for me to watch the wavering chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wind o’er grass, of moods across her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairest in motion, fairer in repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeped in her sunshine, let me, while I may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Partake the bounty; ample ’tis for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That her mirth cheats my temples of their gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her charm makes years long spent seem yet to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wit, goodness, grace, swift flash from grave to gay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these are good, but better far is she.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bon-voyage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bon Voyage</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ship, blest to bear such freight across the blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May stormless stars control thy horoscope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In keel and hull, in every spar and rope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be night and day to thy dear office true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ocean, men’s path and their divider too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fairer shrine of memory and hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the underworld adown thy westering slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’er vanished, or whom such regrets pursue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth all thy surges as when Jove to Crete</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam with less costly burthen, and prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pathway meet for her home-coming soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With golden undulations such as greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The printless summer-sandals of the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tempt the Nautilus his cruise to dare!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-whittier" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Whittier</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On His Seventy-Fifth Birthday</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>New England’s poet, rich in love as years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hills and valleys praise thee, her swift brooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance in thy verse; to her grave sylvan nooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy steps allure us, which the wood-thrush hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As maids their lovers’, and no treason fears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through thee her Merrimacs and Agiochooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a name uncouth win gracious looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetly familiar to both Englands’ ears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peaceful by birthright, as a virgin lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lily’s anchorage, which no eyes behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save those of stars, yet for thy brother’s sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lay in bonds, thou blewst a blast as bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that wherewith the heart of Roland brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far heard across the New World and the Old.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-an-autumn-sketch-of-h-g-wild" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On an Autumn Sketch of H. G. Wild</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thanks to the artist, ever on my wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunset stays: that hill in glory rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those trees and clouds in crimson and in gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn on, nor cool when evening’s shadows fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not round <i>these</i> splendors Midnight wraps her pall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>These</i> leaves the flush of Autumn’s vintage hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Winter’s spite, nor can the Northwind bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deface my chapel’s western window small:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one, ah me! October struck his frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not repaid him with those Tyrian hues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His naked boughs but tell him what is lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And parting comforts of the sun refuse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heaven is bare⁠—ah, were its hollow crost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even with a cloud whose light were yet to lose!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-miss-d-t" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Miss D. T.</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On Her Giving Me a Drawing of Little Street Arabs</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>As, cleansed of Tiber’s and Oblivion’s slime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glow Farnesina’s vaults with shapes again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dreamed some exiled artist from his pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to his Athens and the Muse’s clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So these world-orphaned waifs of Want and Crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Purged by Art’s absolution from the stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the polluting city-flood, regain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ideal grace secure from taint of time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Attic frieze you give, a pictured song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as with words the poet paints, for you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happy pencil at its labor sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stealing his privilege, nor does him wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the false discovering the true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Beauty’s best in unregarded things.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="with-a-copy-of-aucassin-and-nicolete" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">With a Copy of Aucassin and Nicolete</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Leaves fit to have been poor Juliet’s cradle-rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gladness of a heart long quenched in mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They vibrate still, a nest not yet grown cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its fledged burthen. The numb hand of Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly his glass turns; here is endless prime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here lips their roses keep and locks their gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Love in pristine innocency bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks what our grosser conscience makes a crime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it tells the dream that all have known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once in their lives, and to life’s end the few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because its seeds o’er Memory’s desert blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring up in heartsease such as Eden knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it hath a beauty all its own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear Friend, I plucked this herb of grace for you.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-planting-a-tree-at-inveraray" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Planting a Tree at Inveraray</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Who does his duty is a question</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too complex to be solved by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he, I venture the suggestion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does part of his that plants a tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For after he is dead and buried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And epitaphed, and well forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, even his shade by Charon ferried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To⁠—let us not inquire to what,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His deed, its author long outliving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Nature’s mother-care increased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall stand, his verdant almoner, giving</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A kindly dole to man and beast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The wayfarer, at noon reposing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall bless its shadow on the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sheep beneath it huddle, dozing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the thundergust o’erpass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The owl, belated in his plundering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall here await the friendly night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blinking whene’er he wakes, and wondering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What fool it was invented light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hither the busy birds shall flutter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the light timber for their nests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, pausing from their labor, utter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The morning sunshine in their breasts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What though his memory shall have vanished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the good deed he did survives?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not wholly to be banished</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus to be part of many lives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grow, then, my foster-child, and strengthen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bough over bough, a murmurous pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as your stately stem shall lengthen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So may the statelier of Argyll!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-epistle-to-george-william-curtis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">An Epistle to George William Curtis</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>
						<span class="i6">‘De prodome,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Des qu’il s’atorne a grant bonte</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ja n’iert tot dit ne tot conte,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Que leingue ne puet pas retraire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tant d’enor com prodom set faire.’</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Crestien de Troies, <i>Li Romans dou Chevalier au Lyon</i>, 784⁠–⁠788.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">1874</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Curtis, whose Wit, with Fancy arm in arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Masks half its muscle in its skill to charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who so gently can the Wrong expose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sometimes to make converts, never foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or only such as good men must expect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knaves sore with conscience of their own defect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I come with mild remonstrance. Ere I start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kindlier errand interrupts my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must utter, though it vex your ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love, the honor, felt so many years.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curtis, skilled equally with voice and pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stir the hearts or mould the minds of men⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That voice whose music, for I’ve heard you sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet as Casella, can with passion ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pen whose rapid ease ne’er trips with haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor scrapes nor sputters, pointed with good taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First Steele’s, then Goldsmith’s, next it came to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Thackeray rated best of all our crew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had letters kept you, every wreath were yours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had the World tempted, all its chariest doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had swung on flattered hinges to admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such high-bred manners, such good-natured wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At courts, in senates, who so fit to serve?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both invited, but you would not swerve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All meaner prizes waiving that you might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In civic duty spend your heat and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unpaid, untrammelled, with a sweet disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refusing posts men grovel to attain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good Man all own you; what is left me, then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heighten praise with but Good Citizen?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But why this praise to make you blush and stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give a backache to your Easy-Chair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Crestien rightly says no language can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Express the worth of a true Gentleman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I agree; but other thoughts deride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My first intent, and lure my pen aside.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking of you, I see my firelight glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On other faces, loved from long ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear to us both, and all these loves combine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this I send and crowd in every line;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortune with me was in such generous mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all my friends were yours, and all were good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three generations come when one I call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fair grandame, youngest of them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her own Florida who found and sips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fount that fled from Ponce’s longing lips.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How bright they rise and wreathe my hearthstone round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine my thoughts, reply without a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them many a shape that memory sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dear as they, but crowned with aureoles these!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder if, with protest in my thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrived, I find ’twas only love I brought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came with protest; Memory barred the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I repaid you half the debt I owed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No, ’twas not to bring laurels that I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would you wish it, daily seeing fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or our cheap substitute, unknown of yore,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dumped like a load of coal at every door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mime and hetæra getting equal weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him whose toils heroic saved the State.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But praise can harm not who so calmly met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slander’s worst word, nor treasured up the debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing, what all experience serves to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No mud can soil us but the mud we throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have heard harsher voices and more loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As all must, not sworn liegemen of the crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far aloof your silent mind could keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when, in heavens with winter-midnight deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfect moon hangs thoughtful, nor can know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hounds her lucent calm drives mad below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to my business, while you rub your eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder how you ever thought me wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear friend and old, they say you shake your head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wish some bitter words of mine unsaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish they might be⁠—there we are agreed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate to speak, still more what makes the need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must utter what the voice within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dictates, for acquiescence dumb were sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I blurt ungrateful truths, if so they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none may need to say them after me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere my felicity could I attain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The temperate zeal that balances your brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nature still o’erleaps reflection’s plan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one must do his service as he can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think you it were not pleasanter to speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth words that leave unflushed the brow and cheek?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit, well-dined, with cynic smile, unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In private box, spectator of the scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where men the comedy of life rehearse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idly to judge which better and which worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each hireling actor spoiled his worthless part?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it not sweeter with a careless heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In happy commune with the untainted brooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dream all day, or, walled with silent books,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear nor heed the World’s unmeaning noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe in my fortress stored with lifelong joys?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love too well the pleasures of retreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe from the crowd and cloistered from the street;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire that whispers its domestic joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flickering on walls that knew me still a boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew my saintly father; the full days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not careworn from the world’s soul-squandering ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calm days that loiter with snow-silent tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor break my commune with the undying dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truants of Time, to-morrow like to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That come unbid, and claimless glide away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By shelves that sun them in the indulgent Past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Spanish castles, even, were built to last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where saint and sage their silent vigil keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrong hath ceased or sung itself to sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear were my walks, too, gathering fragrant store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mother Nature’s simple-minded lore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I learned all weather-signs of day or night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bird but I could name him by his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No distant tree but by his shape was known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, near at hand, by leaf or bark alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This learning won by loving looks I hived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sweeter lore than all from books derived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know the charm of hillside, field, and wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lake and stream, and the sky’s downy brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of roads sequestered rimmed with sallow sod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But friends with hardhack, aster, goldenrod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or succory keeping summer long its trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven-blue fleckless from the eddying dust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These were my earliest friends, and latest too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still unestranged, whatever fate may do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For years I had these treasures, knew their worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Estate most real man can have on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sank too deep in this soft-stuffed repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hears but rumors of earth’s wrongs and woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too well these Capuas could my muscles waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not void of toils, but toils of choice and taste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These still had kept me could I but have quelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Puritan drop that in my veins rebelled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there were times when silent were my books</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As jailers are, and gave me sullen looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When verses palled, and even the woodland path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By innocent contrast, fed my heart with wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must twist my little gift of words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a scourge of rough and knotted cords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmusical, that whistle as they swing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave on shameless backs their purple sting.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How slow Time comes! Gone who so swift as he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Add but a year, ’tis half a century</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since the slave’s stifled moaning broke my sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard ’gainst my will in that seclusion deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply heard louder for the silence there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so my fancied safeguard made my snare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After that moan had sharpened to a cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a cloud, hand-broad then, heaped all our sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its stored vengeance, and such thunders stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As heaven’s and earth’s remotest chambers heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked to see an ampler atmosphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By that electric passion-gust blown clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked for this; consider what I see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I forbear, ’twould please nor you nor me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To check the items in the bitter list</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all I counted on and all I mist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only three instances I choose from all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each enough to stir a pigeon’s gall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Office a fund for ballot-brokers made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pay the drudges of their gainful trade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our cities taught what conquered cities feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By ædiles chosen that they might safely steal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gold, however got, a title fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such respect as only gold can bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I seem to see this; how shall I gainsay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What all our journals tell me every day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poured our young martyrs their high-hearted blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we might trample to congenial mud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soil with such a legacy sublimed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks an angry scorn is here well-timed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where find retreat? How keep reproach at bay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er I turn some scandal fouls the way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dear friend, if any man I wished to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere surely you whose humor’s honied ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flows flecked with gold of thought, whose generous mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees Paradise regained by all mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose brave example still to vanward shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheeks the retreat, and spurs our lagging lines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was I too bitter? Who his phrase can choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sees the life-blood of his dearest ooze?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved my Country so as only they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who love a mother fit to die for may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved her old renown, her stainless fame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What better proof than that I loathed her shame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many blamed me could not irk me long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if you doubted, must I not be wrong?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not for me to answer; this I know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That man or race so prosperously low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk in success that wrath they cannot feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall taste the spurn of parting Fortune’s heel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never land long lease of empire won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose sons sate silent when base deeds were done.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">Postscript, 1887</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Curtis, so wrote I thirteen years ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tost it unfinished by, and left it so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found lately, I have pieced it out, or tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since time for callid juncture was denied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some of the verses pleased me, it is true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still were pertinent⁠—those honoring you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These now I offer: take them, if you will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the old hand-grasp, when at Shady Hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We met, or Staten Island, in the days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When life was its own spur, nor needed praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If once you thought me rash, no longer fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past my next milestone waits my seventieth year.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mount no longer when the trumpets call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My battle-harness idles on the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spider’s castle, camping-ground of dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not without dints, and all in front, I trust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shivering sometimes it calls me as it hears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afar the charge’s tramp and clash of spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis such murmur only as might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-shell’s lost tradition of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes me muse and wonder Where? and When?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from my cliff I watch the waves of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That climb to break midway their seeming gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think it triumph if they shake their chain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little I ask of Fate; will she refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some days of reconcilement with the Muse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I take my reed again and blow it free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dusty silence, murmuring, ‘Sing to me!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as its stops my curious touch retries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stir of earlier instincts I surprise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instincts, if less imperious, yet more strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happy in the toil that ends with song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Home am I come: not, as I hoped might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the old haunts, too full of ghosts for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the olden dreams that time endears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the loved books that younger grow with years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To country rambles, timing with my tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some happier verse that carols in my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all with sense of something vainly mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something lost, but when I never wist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How empty seems to me the populous street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One figure gone I daily loved to meet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clear, sweet singer with the crown of snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not whiter than the thoughts that housed below!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ah, what absence feel I at my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Dante when he missed his laurelled guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sense of diminution in the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once so inspiring, Emerson not there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But life is sweet, though all that makes it sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lessen like sound of friends’ departing feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Death is beautiful as feet of friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming with welcome at our journey’s end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me Fate gave, whate’er she else denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nature sloping to the southern side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thank her for it, though when clouds arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such natures double-darken gloomy skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I muse upon the margin of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our common pathway to the new To Be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching the sails, that lessen more and more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of good and beautiful embarked before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bits of wreck I patch the boat shall bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me to that unexhausted Otherwhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose friendly-peopled shore I sometimes see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By soft mirage uplifted, beckon me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sadly hear, as lower sinks the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My moorings to the past snap one by one.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="endymion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Endymion</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Mystical Comment on Titian’s ‘Sacred and Profane Love’</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My day began not till the twilight fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, lo, in ether from heaven’s sweetest well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The New Moon swam divinely isolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In maiden silence, she that makes my fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply not knowing it, or only so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I the secrets of my sheep may know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ask I more, entirely blest if she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In letting me adore, ennoble me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To height of what the Gods meant making man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As only she and her best beauty can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine be the love that in itself can find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seed of white thoughts, the lilies of the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seed of that glad surrender of the will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That finds in service self’s true purpose still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love that in outward fairness sees the tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitched for an inmate far more excellent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love with a light irradiate to the core,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lit at her lamp, but fed from inborn store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love thrice-requited with the single joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an immaculate vision naught could cloy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dearer because, so high beyond my scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life grew rich with her, unbribed by hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other guerdon save to think she knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One grateful votary paid her all her due;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy if she, high-radiant there, resigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his sure trust her image in his mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fairer even than Peace is when she comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hushing War’s tumult, and retreating drums</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fade to a murmur like the sough of bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hidden among the noon-stilled linden-trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bringer of quiet, thou that canst allay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dust and din and travail of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strewer of Silence, Giver of the dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth our pastures and our souls renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still dwell remote, still on thy shoreless sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Float unattained in silent empery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still light my thoughts, nor listen to a prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would make thee less imperishably fair!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Can, then, my twofold nature find content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain conceits of airy blandishment?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask I no more? Since yesterday I task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My storm-strewn thoughts to tell me what I ask:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint premenitions of mutation strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steal o’er my perfect orb, and, with the change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself am changed; the shadow of my earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkens the disk of that celestial worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which only yesterday could still suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upwards to waft my thoughts in sacrifice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heightened fancy with its touches warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moulds to a woman’s that ideal form;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet a woman’s wholly, but divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With awe her purer essence bred in mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it long brooding on their own surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, of the eyes engendered, fools the eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or have I seen through that translucent air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Presence shaped in its seclusions bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Goddess looking on me from above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As look our russet maidens when they love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But high-uplifted, o’er our human heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And passion-paths too rough for her pearl feet?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Slowly the Shape took outline as I gazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At her full-orbed or crescent, till, bedazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wonder-working light that subtly wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brain to its own substance, steeping thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In trances such as poppies give, I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things shut from vision by sight’s sober law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amorphous, changeful, but defined at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the peerless Shape mine eyes hold fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, too, at first I worshipt: soon, like wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes, in mine poured, frenzy-philtred mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passion put Worship’s priestly raiment on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the woman knelt, the Goddess gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was I, then, more than mortal made? or she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less than divine that she might mate with me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If mortal merely, could my nature cope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such o’ermastery of maddening hope?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Goddess, could she feel the blissful woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That women in their self-surrender know?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Long she abode aloof there in her heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far as the grape-bunch of the Pleiad seven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond my madness’ utmost leap; but here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes have feigned of late her rapture near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moulded of mind-mist that broad day dispels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here in these shadowy woods and brook-lulled dells.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Have no heaven-habitants e’er felt a void</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hearts sublimed with ichor unalloyed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’er longed to mingle with a mortal fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intense with pathos of its briefer date?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could she partake, and live, our human stains?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even with the thought there tingles through my veins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sense of unwarned renewal; I, the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive and house again the ardor fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once Alcestis; to the ruddy brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel masculine virtue flooding every limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life, like Spring returning, brings the key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sets my senses from their winter free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing like naked fauns too glad for shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her passion, purified to palest flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can it thus kindle? Is her purpose this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not argue, lest I lose a bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes me dream Tithonus’ fortune mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or what of it was palpably divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere came the fruitlessly immortal gift;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot curb my hope’s imperious drift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wings with fire my dull mortality;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though fancy-forged, ’tis all I feel or see.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My Goddess sinks; round Latmos’ darkening brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembles the parting of her presence now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint as the perfume left upon the grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her limbs’ pressure or her feet that pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By me conjectured, but conjectured so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As things I touch far fainter substance show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it mine eyes’ imposture I have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flit with the moonbeams on from shade to sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the wood-openings? Nay, I see her now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her heaven new-lighted, from her brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hair breeze-scattered, like loose mists that blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across her crescent, goldening as they go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High-kirtled for the chase, and what was shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of maiden rondure, like the rose half-blown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If dream, turn real! If a vision, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take mortal shape, my philtre’s spell obey!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If hags compel thee from thy secret sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gruesome incantations, why not I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose only magic is that I distil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A potion, blent of passion, thought, and will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeper in reach, in force of fate more rich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than e’er was juice wrung by Thessalian witch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From moon-enchanted herbs⁠—a potion brewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my best life in each diviner mood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself the elixir am, myself the bowl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seething and mantling with my soul of soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taste and be humanized: what though the cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy lips frenzied, shatter? Drink it up!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If but these arms may clasp, o’erquited so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My world, thy heaven, all life means I shall know.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sure she hath heard my prayer and granted half,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Gods do who at mortal madness laugh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet if life’s solid things illusion seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why may not substance wear the mask of dream?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sleep she comes; she visits me in dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as her image in a thousand streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in my veins, that her obey, she sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Floating and flaming there, her images</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear to my little world’s remotest zone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad messages of her, and her alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silence-sandalled Sleep she comes to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(But softer-footed, sweeter-browed, than she,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In motion gracious as a seagull’s wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her bright limbs, moving, seem to sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me believe so, then, if so I may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the night’s bounty feed my beggared day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dreams I see her lay the goddess down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bow and quiver, and her crescent-crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flicker and fade away to dull eclipse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As down to mine she deigns her longed-for lips;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as her neck my happy arms enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flooded and lustred with her loosened gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She whispers words each sweeter than a kiss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, wakened with the shock of sudden bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My arms are empty, my awakener fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, silent in the silent sky o’erhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But coldly as on ice-plated snow, she gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself the mother and the child of dreams.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gone is the time when phantasms could appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My quest phantasmal and bring cheated ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, if she glorified my dreams, I felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all my limbs a change immortal melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At touch of hers illuminate with soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long could I be stilled with Fancy’s dole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too soon the mortal mixture in me caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red fire from her celestial flame, and fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tyrannous control in all my veins:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fool’s prayer was accepted; what remains?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or was it some eidolon merely, sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her who rules the shades in banishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mock me with her semblance? Were it thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How ‘scape I shame, whose will was traitorous?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What shall compensate an ideal dimmed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How blanch again my statue virgin-limbed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soiled with the incense-smoke her chosen priest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poured more profusely as within decreased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire unearthly, fed with coals from far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the soul’s shrine? Could my fallen star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be set in heaven again by prayers and tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quenchless sacrifice of all my years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How would the victim to the flamen leap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life for life’s redemption paid hold cheap!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But what resource when she herself descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her blue throne, and o’er her vassal bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shape thrice-deified by love, those eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein the Lethe of all others lies?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When my white queen of heaven’s remoteness tires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself against her other self conspires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes woman’s nature, walks in mortal ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finds in my remorse her beauty’s praise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all would I renounce to dream again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dream in dreams fulfilled that made my pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My noble pain that heightened all my years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crowns to win and prowess-breeding tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, would that dream renounce once more to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her sky there looking down at me!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Goddess, reclimb thy heaven, and be once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An inaccessible splendor to adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A faith, a hope of such transcendent worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bred ennobling discontent with earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give back the longing, back the elated mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, fed with thee, spurned every meaner good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give even the spur of impotent despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, without hope, still bade aspire and dare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give back the need to worship, that still pours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the soul the virtue it adores!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nay, brightest and most beautiful, deem naught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These frantic words, the reckless wind of thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still stoop, still grant⁠—I live but in thy will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be what thou wilt, but be a woman still!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vainly I cried, nor could myself believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what I prayed for I would fain receive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My moon is set; my vision set with her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more can worship vain my pulses stir.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess Triform, I own thy triple spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heaven’s queen⁠—queen, too, of my earth and hell!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-black-preacher" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Black Preacher</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Breton Legend</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>At Carnac in Brittany, close on the bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They show you a church, or rather the gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ribs of a dead one, left there to bleach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the wreck lying near on the crest of the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roofless and splintered with thunder-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Mid lichen-blurred gravestones all alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the kind of ruin strange sights to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may have their teaching for you and me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Something like this, then, my guide had to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perched on a saint cracked across when he fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since I might chance give his meaning a wrench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He talking his <i>patois</i> and I English-French,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll put what he told me, preserving the tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a rhymed prose that makes it half his, half my own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An abbey-church stood here, once on a time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built as a death-bed atonement for crime:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas for somebody’s sins, I know not whose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sinners are plenty, and you can choose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though a cloister now of the dusk-winged bat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas rich enough once, and the brothers grew fat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looser in girdle and purpler in jowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing good rest to the founder’s lost soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But one day came Northmen, and lithe tongues of fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lapped up the chapter-house, licked off the spire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left all a rubbish-heap, black and dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where only the wind sings <i>miserere</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No priest has kneeled since at the altar’s foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose crannies are searched by the nightshade’s root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor sound of service is ever heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except from throat of the unclean bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hooting to unassoiled shapes as they pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In midnights unholy his witches’ mass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shouting ‘Ho! ho!’ from the belfry high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the Devil’s sabbath-train whirls by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But once a year, on the eve of All-Souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through these arches dishallowed the organ rolls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fingers long fleshless the bell-ropes work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chimes peal muffled with sea-mists mirk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skeleton windows are traced anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the baleful nicker of corpse-lights blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ghosts must come, so the legend saith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a preaching of Reverend Doctor Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Abbots, monks, barons, and ladies fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the dull summons and gather there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rustle of silk now, no clink of mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever a one greets his church-mate pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No knight whispers love in the <i>châtelaine’s</i> ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His next-door neighbor this five-hundred year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No monk has a sleek <i>benedicite</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the great lord shadowy now as he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor needeth any to hold his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he lose the least word of Doctor Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He chooses his text in the Book Divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tenth verse of the Preacher in chapter nine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘ “Whatsoever thy hand shall find thee to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That do with thy whole might, or thou shalt rue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no man is wealthy, or wise, or brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that quencher of might-be’s and would-be’s, the grave.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid by the Bridegroom, “To-morrow,” ye said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And To-morrow was digging a trench for your bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye said, “God can wait; let us finish our wine;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye had wearied Him, fools, and that last knock was mine!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I can’t pretend to give you the sermon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or say if the tongue were French, Latin, or German;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever he preached in, I give you my word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meaning was easy to all that heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famous preachers there have been and be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never was one so convincing as he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So blunt was never a begging friar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Jesuit’s tongue so barbed with fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cameronian never, nor Methodist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrung gall out of Scripture with such a twist.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And would you know who his hearers must be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tell you just what my guide told me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excellent teaching men have, day and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From two earnest friars, a black and a white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Dominican Death and the Carmelite Life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And between these two there is never strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each has his separate office and station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each his own work in the congregation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoso to the white brother deafens his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannot be wrought on by blessings or tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake In his coffin must wait and wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that blackness of darkness that means <i>too late</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come once a year, when the ghost-bell tolls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As till Doomsday it shall on the eve of All-Souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear Doctor Death, whose words smart with the brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Preacher, the tenth verse of chapter nine.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="arcadia-rediviva" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Arcadia Rediviva</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I, walking the familiar street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While a crammed horse-car jingled through it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was lifted from my prosy feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in Arcadia ere I knew it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fresh sward for gravel soothed my tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shepherd’s pipes my ear delighted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The riddle may be lightly read:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I met two lovers newly plighted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They murmured by in happy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New plans for paradise devising,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as the moon, with pensive stare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er Mistress Craigie’s pines was rising.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Astarte, known nigh threescore years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me to no speechless rapture urges;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them in Elysium she enspheres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Queen, from of old, of thaumaturges.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The railings put forth bud and bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The house-fronts all with myrtles twine them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light-winged Loves in every room</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make nests, and then with kisses line them.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O sweetness of untasted life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O dream, its own supreme fulfillment!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hours with all illusion rife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As ere the heart divined what ill meant!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘<i>Et ego</i>’, sighed I to myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strove some vain regrets to bridle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Though now laid dusty on the shelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was hero once of such an idyl!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘An idyl ever newly sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although since Adam’s day recited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose measures time them to Love’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose sense is every ill requited.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Maiden, if I may counsel, drain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each drop of this enchanted season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For even our honeymoons must wane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Convicted of green cheese by Reason.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And none will seem so safe from change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in such skies benignant hover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As this, beneath whose witchery strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You tread on rose-leaves with your lover.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The glass unfilled all tastes can fit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As round its brim Conjecture dances;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not Mephisto’s self hath wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To draw such vintages as Fancy’s.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When our pulse beats its minor key,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When play-time halves and school-time doubles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age fills the cup with serious tea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which once Dame Clicquot starred with bubbles.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Fie, Mr. Graybeard! Is this wise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is this the moral of a poet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, when the plant of Eden dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is privileged once more to sow it!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘That herb of clay-disdaining root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From stars secreting what it feeds on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is burnt-out passion’s slag and soot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fit soil to strew its dainty seeds on?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Pray, why, if in Arcadia once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Need one so soon forget the way there?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or why, once there, be such a dunce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As not contentedly to stay there?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dear child, ’twas but a sorry jest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from my heart I hate the cynic</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who makes the Book of Life a nest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For comments staler than rabbinic.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If Love his simple spell but keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life with ideal eyes to flatter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grail itself were crockery cheap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Every-day’s communion-platter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One Darby is to me well known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, as the hearth between them blazes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees the old moonlight shine on Joan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And float her youthward in its hazes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He rubs his spectacles, he stares⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis the same face that witched him early!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gropes for his remaining hairs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is this a fleece that feels so curly?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Good heavens! but now ’twas winter gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I of years had more than plenty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The almanac’s a fool! ’Tis May!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hang family Bibles! I am twenty!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Come, Joan, your arm; we’ll walk the room⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lane, I mean⁠—do you remember?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How confident the roses bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if it ne’er could be December!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Nor more it shall, while in your eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart its summer heat recovers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, howe’er your mirror lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find your old beauty in your lover’s.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-nest" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Nest</h2>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">May</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When oaken woods with buds are pink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And new-come birds each morning sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When fickle May on Summer’s brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pauses, and knows not which to fling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether fresh bud and bloom again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hoar-frost silvering hill and plain,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then from the honeysuckle gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The oriole with experienced quest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twitches the fibrous bark away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cordage of his hammock-nest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheering his labor with a note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich as the orange of his throat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High o’er the loud and dusty road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soft gray cup in safety swings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To brim ere August with its load</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of downy breasts and throbbing wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which the friendly elm-tree heaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An emerald roof with sculptured eaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Below, the noisy World drags by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the old way, because it must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bride with heartbreak in her eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mourner following hated dust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy duty, wingèd flame of Spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but to love, and fly, and sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, happy life, to soar and sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the life by mortals led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing the merry months away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Master, not slave of daily bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when the Autumn comes, to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherever sunshine beckons thee!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">Palinode⁠—December</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like some lorn abbey now, the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stands roofless in the bitter air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ruins on its floor is strewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carven foliage quaint and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And homeless winds complain along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The columned choir once thrilled with song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, dear nest, whence joy and praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thankful oriole used to pour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swing’st empty while the north winds chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their snowy swarms from Labrador:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, loyal to the happy past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee still for what thou wast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, when the Summer graces flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From other nests more dear than thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, where June crowded once, I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only bare trunk and disleaved bough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When springs of life that gleamed and gushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Run chilled, and slower, and are hushed;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When our own branches, naked long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vacant nests of Spring betray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurseries of passion, love, and song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vanished as our year grew gray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Life drones o’er a tale twice told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er embers pleading with the cold⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I’ll trust, that, like the birds of Spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our good goes not without repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But only flies to soar and sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far off in some diviner air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where we shall find it in the calms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that fair garden ’neath the palms.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="a-youthful-experiment-in-english-hexameters" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Youthful Experiment in English Hexameters</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Impressions of Homer</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes come pauses of calm, when the rapt bard, holding his heart back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over his deep mind muses, as when o’er awe-stricken ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poises a heapt cloud luridly, ripening the gale and the thunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow rolls onward the verse with a long swell heaving and swinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeming to wait till, gradually wid’ning from far-off horizons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piling the deeps up, heaping the glad-hearted surges before it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers the thought as a strong wind darkening and cresting the tumult.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then every pause, every heave, each trough in the waves, has its meaning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-sailed, forth like a tall ship steadies the theme, and around it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaping beside it in glad strength, running in wild glee beyond it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harmonies billow exulting and floating the soul where it lists them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swaying the listener’s fantasy hither and thither like drift-weed.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="birthday-verses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Birthday Verses</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Written in a Child’s Album</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas sung of old in hut and hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How once a king in evil hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung musing o’er his castle wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, lost in idle dreams, let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the sea his ring of power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, let him sorrow as he might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pledge his daughter and his throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To who restored the jewel bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broken spell would ne’er unite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grim old ocean held its own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those awful powers on man that wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On man, the beggar or the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hovel bare or hall of state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A magic ring that masters fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With each succeeding birthday bring.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therein are set four jewels rare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pearl winter, summer’s ruby blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring’s emerald, and, than all more fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall’s pensive opal, doomed to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heart of fire bedreamed with haze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him the simple spell who knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirits of the ring to sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh power with every sunrise flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And royal pursuivants are those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fly his mandates to obey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he that with a slackened will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams of things past or things to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him the charm is slipping still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drops, ere he suspect the ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the inexorable sea.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="estrangement" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Estrangement</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The path from me to you that led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Untrodden long, with grass is grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute carpet that his lieges spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the Prince Oblivion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he goes visiting the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And who are they but who forget?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You, who my coming could surmise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere any hint of me as yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Warned other ears and other eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the path blurred without regret.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when I trace its windings sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With saddened steps, at every spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That feels the memory in my feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each grass-blade turns forget-me-not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where murmuring bees your name repeat.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="phoebe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Phœbe</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ere pales in Heaven the morning star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bird, the loneliest of its kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears Dawn’s faint footfall from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While all its mates are dumb and blind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is a wee sad-colored thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As shy and secret as a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, ere in choir the robins sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pipes its own name like one afraid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It seems pain-prompted to repeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The story of some ancient ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But <i>Phoebe! Phoebe!</i> sadly sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is all it says, and then is still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It calls and listens. Earth and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hushed by the pathos of its fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen: no whisper of reply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes from its doom-dissevered mate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><i>Phoebe!</i> it calls and calls again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Ovid, could he but have heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had hung a legendary pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the memory of the bird;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A pain articulate so long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In penance of some mouldered crime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose ghost still flies the Furies’ thong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down the waste solitudes of time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Waif of the young World’s wonder-hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When gods found mortal maidens fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will malign was joined with power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love’s kindly laws to overbear,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Like Progne, did it feel the stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And coil of the prevailing words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close round its being, and compress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Man’s ampler nature to a bird’s?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One only memory left of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The motley crowd of vanished scenes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hers, and vain impulse to recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By repetition what it means.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><i>Phoebe!</i> is all it has to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In plaintive cadence o’er and o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like children that have lost their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And know their names, but nothing more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it a type, since Nature’s Lyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vibrates to every note in man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that insatiable desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meant to be so since life began?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I, in strange lands at gray of dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wakeful, have heard that fruitless plaint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Memory’s chambers deep withdrawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renew its iterations faint.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So nigh! yet from remotest years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It summons back its magic, rife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With longings unappeased, and tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drawn from the very source of life.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="das-ewig-weibliche" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Das Ewig-Weibliche</h2>
			<p>
				<span>How was I worthy so divine a loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deepening my midnights, kindling all my morns?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why waste such precious wood to make my cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such far-sought roses for my crown of thorns?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when she came, how earned I such a gift?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why spend on me, a poor earth-delving mole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fireside sweetnesses, the heavenward lift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hourly mercy, of a woman’s soul?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, did we know to give her all her right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What wonders even in our poor clay were done!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not Woman leaves us to our night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But our brute earth that grovels from her sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our nobler cultured fields and gracious domes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We whirl too oft from her who still shines on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light in vain our caves and clefts, the homes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of night-bird instincts pained till she be gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still must this body starve our souls with shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when Death makes us what we were before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall her sunshine all our depths invade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not a shadow stain heaven’s crystal floor.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-recall" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Recall</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Come back before the birds are flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the leaves desert the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, through the lonely alleys blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whisper their vain regrets to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who drive before a blast more rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plaything of my gusty mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain pursuing and pursued!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, come although the boughs be bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though snowflakes fledge the summer’s nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in some far Ausonian air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thrush, your minstrel, warm his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, sunshine’s treasurer, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To doubting flowers their faith in spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To birds and me the need to sing!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="absence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Absence</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Sleep is Death’s image⁠—poets tell us so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Absence is the bitter self of Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, you away, Life’s lips their red forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parched in an air unfreshened by your breath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Light of those eyes that made the light of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where shine you? On what happier fields and flowers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven’s lamps renew their lustre less divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only serve to count my darkened hours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If with your presence went your image too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brain-born ghost my path would never cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which meets me now where’er I once met you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then vanishes, to multiply my loss.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="monna-lisa" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Monna Lisa</h2>
			<p>
				<span>She gave me all that woman can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor her soul’s nunnery forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A confidence that man to man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without remorse can never show.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rare art, that can the sense refine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till not a pulse rebellious stirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, since she never can be mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes it seem sweeter to be hers!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-optimist" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Optimist</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Turbid from London’s noise and smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here I find air and quiet too;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Air filtered through the beech and oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet by nothing harsher broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than wood-dove’s meditative coo.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Truce of God is here; the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighs as men sigh relieved from care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or tilts as lightly in the trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As might a robin: all is ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pledge of ampler ease to spare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Time, leaning on his scythe, forgets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn the hour-glass in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all life’s petty cares and frets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its teasing hopes and weak regrets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are still as that oblivious sand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Repose fills all the generous space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of undulant plain; the rook and crow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hush; ’tis as if a silent grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Nature murmured, calmed the face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Heaven above and Earth below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From past and future toils I rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Sabbath pacifies my year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am the halcyon, this my nest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all is safely for the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the World’s there and I am here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So I turn tory for the nonce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think the radical a bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cannot see, thick-witted dunce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That what was good for people once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be as good forevermore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sun, sink no deeper down the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth, never change this summer mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breeze, loiter thus forever by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir the dead leaf or let it lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I am happy, all is good.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-burning-some-old-letters" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Burning Some Old Letters</h2>
			<p>
				<span>With what odorous woods and spices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spared for royal sacrifices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what costly gums seld-seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoarded to embalm a queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what frankincense and myrrh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn these precious parts of her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of life and light and sweetness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a summer day’s completeness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy of sun and song of bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Running wild in every word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of all the superhuman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grace and winsomeness of woman?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O’er these leaves her wrist has slid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled with veins where fire is hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the skin’s pellucid veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the opal’s passion pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This her breath has sweetened; this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still seems trembling with the kiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She half-ventured on my name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brow and cheek and throat aflame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over all caressing lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunshine left there by her eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From them all an effluence rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her nearness fills the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the murmur I half-hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her light feet drawing near.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rarest woods were coarse and rough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetest spice not sweet enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too impure all earthly fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this sacred funeral-pyre;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These rich relics must suffice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their own dear sacrifice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Seek we first an altar fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For such victims laid on it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall be this slab brought home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In old happy days from Rome⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lazuli, once blest to line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dian’s inmost cell and shrine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently now I lay them there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure as Dian’s forehead bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet suffused with warmer hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as only Latmos knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fire I gather from the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a virgin lens; ’tis done!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mount the flames, red, yellow, blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As her moods were shining through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the moment’s impulse born⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moods of sweetness, playful scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half defiance, half surrender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than cruel, more than tender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flouts, caresses, sunshine, shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gracious doublings of a maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infinite in guileless art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing hide-seek with her heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the altar now, alas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There they lie a crinkling mass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writhing still, as if with grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went the life from every leaf;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then (heart-breaking palimpsest!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanishing ere wholly guessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly some lines flash back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traced in lightning on the black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And confess, till now denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the fire they strove to hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they told me, sacred trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stays to glorify my dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to burn through dust and damp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a mage’s deathless lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While an atom of this frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lasts to feed the dainty flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All is ashes now, but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my soul are laid away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their radiance round me hovers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft as moonlight over lovers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shutting her and me alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dream-Edens of our own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First of lovers to invent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, and teach men what it meant.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-protest" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Protest</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I could not bear to see those eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all with wasteful largess shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that delight of welcome rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sunshine strained through amber wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that a glow from deeper skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From conscious fountains more divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is (is it?) mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be beautiful to all mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Nature fashioned thee to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould anger me did all not find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet perfection that’s in thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet keep one charm of charms behind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, thou’rt so rich, keep two or three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For (is it?) me!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-petition" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Petition</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, tell me less or tell me more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft eyes with mystery at the core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That always seem to melt my own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frankly as pansies fully grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet waver still ’tween no and yes!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So swift to cavil and deny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then parley with concessions shy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear eyes, that make their youth be mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through my inmost shadows shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, tell me more or tell me less!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fact-or-fancy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fact or Fancy?</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In town I hear, scarce wakened yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My neighbor’s clock behind the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Record the day’s increasing debt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And <i>Cuckoo! Cuckoo!</i> faintly call.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our senses run in deepening grooves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrown out of which they lose their tact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And consciousness with effort moves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From habit past to present fact.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, in the country waked to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hear, unwitting of the change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cuckoo’s throb from far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begin to strike, nor think it strange.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sound creates its wonted frame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My bed at home, the songster hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the wainscoting⁠—all came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As long association bid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, half aroused, ere yet Sleep’s mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the mind’s uplands furl away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the familiar sound I list,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disputed for by Night and Day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I count to learn how late it is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until, arrived at thirty-four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I question, ‘What strange world is this</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose lavish hours would make me poor?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><i>Cuckoo! Cuckoo!</i> Still on it went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hints of mockery in its tone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How could such hoards of time be spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By one poor mortal’s wit alone?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have it! Grant, ye kindly Powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I from this spot may never stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If only these uncounted hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May pass, and seem too short, with Her!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But who She is, her form and face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These to the world of dream belong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She moves through fancy’s visioned space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unbodied, like the cuckoo’s song.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="agro-dolce" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Agro-Dolce</h2>
			<p>
				<span>One kiss from all others prevents me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sets all my pulses astir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burns on my lips and torments me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis the kiss that I fain would give her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One kiss for all others requites me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although it is never to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweetens my dreams and invites me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis the kiss that she dare not give me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, could it he mine, it were sweeter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than honey bees garner in dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though its bliss on my lips were fleeter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than a swallow’s dip to the stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, thus denied, it can never</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the prose of life vanish away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er my lips it must hover forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sunshine and shade of my day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-broken-tryst" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Broken Tryst</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Walking alone where we walked together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When June was breezy and blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watch in the gray autumnal weather</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The leaves fall inconstant as you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If a dead leaf startle behind me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I think ’tis your garment’s hem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, oh, where no memory could find me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might I whirl away with them!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="casa-sin-alma" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Casa Sin Alma</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Recuerdo de Madrid</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Silencioso por la puerta</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voy de su casa desierta</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do siempre feliz entré,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y la encuentro en vano abierta</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cual la boca de una muerta</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despues que el alma se fué.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-christmas-carol" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Christmas Carol</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">For the Sunday-School Children of the Church of the Disciples</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>‘What means this glory round our feet,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Magi mused, ‘more bright than morn?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And voices chanted clear and sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘To-day the Prince of Peace is born!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘What means that star,’ the Shepherds said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘That brightens through the rocky glen?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And angels, answering overhead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sang, ‘Peace on earth, good-will to men!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis eighteen hundred years and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since those sweet oracles were dumb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wait for Him, like them of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas, He seems so slow to come!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But it was said, in words of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No time or sorrow e’er shall dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That little children might be bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In perfect trust to come to Him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All round about our feet shall shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A light like that the wise men saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we our loving wills incline</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that sweet Life which is the Law.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So shall we learn to understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The simple faith of shepherds then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, clasping kindly hand in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sing, ‘Peace on earth, good-will to men!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And they who do their souls no wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But keep at eve the faith of morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall daily hear the angel-song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘To-day the Prince of Peace is born!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="my-portrait-gallery" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">My Portrait Gallery</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oft round my hall of portraiture I gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Memory reared, the artist wise and holy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From stainless quarries of deep-buried days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as I muse in soothing melancholy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your faces glow in more than mortal youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Companions of my prime, now vanished wholly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loud, impetuous boy, the low-voiced maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now for the first time seen in flawless truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, never master that drew mortal breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can match thy portraits, just and generous Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose brush with sweet regretful tints is laden!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou paintest that which struggled here below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half understood, or understood for woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a sweet forewarning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mak’st round the sacred front an aureole glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven of that light that rose on Easter morning.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="paolo-to-francesca" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Paolo to Francesca</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I was with thee in Heaven: I cannot tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If years or moments, so the sudden bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first we found, then lost, us in a kiss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abolished Time, abolished Earth and Hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left only Heaven. Then from our blue there fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dagger’s flash, and did not fall amiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nothing now can rob my life of this⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That once with thee in Heaven, all else is well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us, undivided when man’s vengeance came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God’s half-forgives that doth not here divide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, were this bitter whirl-blast fanged with flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me ’twere summer, we being side by side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This granted, I God’s mercy will not blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, given thy nearness, nothing is denied.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-scottish-border" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Scottish Border</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>As sinks the sun behind yon alien hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose heather-purple slopes, in glory rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flush all my thought with momentary gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What pang of vague regret my fancy thrills?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here ’tis enchanted ground the peasant tills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the shy ballad dared its blooms unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And memory’s glamour makes new sights seem old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when our life some vanished dream fulfils.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not to thee belong these painless tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land loved ere seen: before my darkened eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From far beyond the waters and the years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horizons mute that wait their poet rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stream before me fades and disappears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the Charles the western splendor dies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-on-being-asked-for-an-autograph-in-venice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On Being Asked for an Autograph in Venice</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Amid these fragments of heroic days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thought met deed with mutual passion’s leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There sits a Fame whose silent trump makes cheap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What short-lived rumor of ourselves we raise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had far other estimate of praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stamped the signet of their souls so deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In art and action, and whose memories keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their height like stars above our misty ways:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this grave presence to record my name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something within me hangs the head and shrinks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull were the soul without some joy in fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet here to claim remembrance were, methinks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like him who, in the desert’s awful frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Notches his cockney initials on the Sphinx.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-dancing-bear" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Dancing Bear</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Far over Elf-land poets stretch their sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And win their dearest crowns beyond the goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their own conscious purpose; they control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gossamer threads wide-flown our fancy’s play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so our action. On my walk to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wallowing bear begged clumsily his toll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When straight a vision rose of Atta Troll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scenes ideal witched mine eyes away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘<i>Merci, Mossieu!</i>’ the astonished bear-ward cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grateful for thrice his hope to me, the slave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of partial memory, seeing at his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bear immortal. The glad dole I gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was none of mine; poor Heine o’er the wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atlantic welter stretched it from his grave.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-maple" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Maple</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The Maple puts her corals on in May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While loitering frosts about the lowlands cling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be in tune with what the robins sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plastering new log-huts ‘mid her branches gray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the Autumn southward turns away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in her veins burns most the blood of Spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every leaf, intensely blossoming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes the year’s sunset pale the set of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Youth unprescient, were it only so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With trees you plant, and in whose shade reclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking their drifting blooms Fate’s coldest snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You carve dear names upon the faithful rind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in that vernal stem the cross foreknow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Age shall bear, silent, yet unresigned!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="nightwatches" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Nightwatches</h2>
			<p>
				<span>While the slow clock, as they were miser’s gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counts and recounts the mornward steps of Time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness thrills with conscience of each crime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Death committed, daily grown more bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more the list of all my wrongs is told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ghostly hands stretch to me from my prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helpless farewells, as from an alien clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each new loss redoubles all the old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This morn ’twas May; the blossoms were astir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With southern wind; but now the boughs are bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With snow instead of birds, and all things freeze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How much of all my past is dumb with her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of my future, too, for with her went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half of that world I ever cared to please!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="death-of-queen-mercedes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Death of Queen Mercedes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hers all that Earth could promise or bestow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth, Beauty, Love, a crown, the beckoning years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lids never wet, unless with joyous tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life remote from every sordid woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by a nation’s swelled to lordlier flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What lurking-place, thought we, for doubts or fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, the day’s swan, she swam along the cheers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Alcalá, five happy months ago?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guns were shouting Io Hymen then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, on her birthday, now denounce her doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same white steeds that tossed their scorn of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day as proudly drag her to the tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grim jest of fate! Yet who dare call it blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing what life is, what our human-kind?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="prison-of-cervantes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prison of Cervantes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Seat of all woes? Though Nature’s firm decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The narrowing soul with narrowing dungeon bind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet was his free of motion as the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held both worlds, of spirit and sense, in fee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In charmed communion with his dual mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wandered Spain, himself both knight and hind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redressing wrongs he knew must ever be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His humor wise could see life’s long deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s baffled aims, nor therefore both despise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His knightly nature could ill fortune greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an old friend. Whose ever such kind eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pierced so deep, such scope, save his whose feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Avon ceased ’neath the same April’s skies?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-lady-playing-on-the-cithern" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Lady Playing on the Cithern</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So dreamy-soft the notes, so far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seem to fall, the horns of Oberon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow their faint Hunt’s-up from the good-time gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, on a morning of long-withered May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larks tinkle unseen o’er Claudian arches gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Romeward crawl from Dreamland; and anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fancy flings her cloak of Darkness on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vanish from the dungeon of To-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In happier times and scenes I seem to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as her fingers flutter o’er the strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The days return when I was young as she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my fledged thoughts began to feel their wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all Heaven’s blue before them: Memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Music is it such enchantment sings?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-eyes-treasury" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Eye’s Treasury</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Gold of the reddening sunset, backward thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In largess on my tall paternal trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou with false hope or fear didst never tease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart that hoards thee; nor is childhood flown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him whose life no fairer boon hath known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that what pleased him earliest still should please:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who hath incomes safe from chance as these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone in a moment, yet for life his own?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other gold is slave of earthward laws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This to the deeps of ether takes its flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the topmost leaves makes glorious pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of parting pathos ere it yield to night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So linger, as from me earth’s light withdraws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear touch of Nature, tremulously bright!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="pessimoptimism" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Pessimoptimism</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ye little think what toil it was to build</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A world of men imperfect even as this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where we conceive of Good by what we miss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ill by that wherewith best days are filled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A world whose every atom is self-willed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose corner-stone is propt on artifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose joy is shorter-lived than woman’s kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wisdom hoarded is but to be spilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this is better than a life of caves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose highest art was scratching on a bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or chipping toilsome arrowheads of flint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better, though doomed to hear while Cleon raves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see wit’s want eterned in paint or stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wade the drain-drenched shoals of daily print.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-brakes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Brakes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What countless years and wealth of brain were spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring us hither from our caves and huts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trace through pathless wilds the deep-worn ruts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of faith and habit, by whose deep indent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prudence may guide if genius be not lent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Genius, not always happy when it shuts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its ears against the plodder’s ifs and buts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping in one rash leap to snatch the event.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers of the sun, whose hoofs of flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consume morn’s misty threshold, are exact</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As bankers’ clerks, and all this star-poised frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One swerve allowed, were with convulsion rackt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This world were doomed, should Dulness fail, to tame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wit’s feathered heels in the stern stocks of fact.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-foreboding" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Foreboding</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What were the whole void world, if thou wert dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose briefest absence can eclipse my day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make the hours that danced with Time away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag their funereal steps with muffled head?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through thee, meseems, the very rose is red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thee the violet steals its breath in May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thee draw life all things that grow not gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by thy force the happy stars are sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou near, the hope of thee to overflow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fills all my earth and heaven, as when in Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere April come, the birds and blossoms know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grasses brighten round her feet to cling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, and this hope delights all nature so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the dumb turf I tread on seems to sing.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="under-the-october-maples" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Under the October Maples</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What mean these banners spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These paths with royal red</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So gaily carpeted?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes there a prince to-day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such footing were too fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For feet less argentine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Dian’s own or thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Queen whom my tides obey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Surely for thee are meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These hues so orient</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with a sultan’s tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each tree invites the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Earth such homage pays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So decks her dusty ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keeps such holidays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one and only one.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My brain shapes form and face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throbs with the rhythmic grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cadence of her pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all fine instincts true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her footsteps, as they pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than moonbeams over grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall lighter⁠—but, alas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More insubstantial too!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="loves-clock" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Love’s Clock</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Pastoral</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header role="presentation">
					<p>Daphnis <i>waiting</i></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘O Dryad feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be doubly fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Timed to my heart’s expectant beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I await her!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At four,” vowed she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis scarcely three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet by <i>my</i> time it seems to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A good hour later!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header role="presentation">
					<p>Chloe</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Bid me not stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear reason, pray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis striking six! Sure never day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was short as this is!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header role="presentation">
					<p>Daphnis</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Reason nor rhyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in the chime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It can’t be five; I’ve scarce had time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To beg two kisses!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header role="presentation">
					<p>Both</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Early or late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When lovers wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Love’s watch gains, if Time a gait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So snail-like chooses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should his feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become more fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than cowards’ are, when lovers meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Love’s watch loses?’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="eleanor-makes-macaroons" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Eleanor Makes Macaroons</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Light of triumph in her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleanor her apron ties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she pushes back her sleeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High resolve her bosom heaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten, cook! impel the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pace of her desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you hope to save your soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring a virgin casserole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brightest bring of silver spoons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleanor makes macaroons!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Almond-blossoms, now adance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the smile of Southern France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave your sport with sun and breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think of duty, not of ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashion, ’neath their jerkins brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kernels white as thistle-down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiny cheeses made with cream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Galaxy’s mid-stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blanched in light of honeymoons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleanor makes macaroons!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now for sugar⁠—nay, our plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tolerates no work of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurry, then, ye golden bees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fetch your clearest honey, please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garnered on a Yorkshire moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the last larks sing and soar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heather-blossoms sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sea-breeze and sunshine meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Augusts mask as Junes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleanor makes macaroons!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next the pestle and mortar find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure rock-crystal⁠—these to grind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into paste more smooth than silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whiter than the milkweed’s milk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread it on a rose-leaf, thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cate to please Theocritus;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the fire with spices swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, for her completer spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mystic canticles she croons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleanor makes macaroons!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Perfect! and all this to waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a graybeard’s palsied taste!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poets so their verses write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap them full of life and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then fling them to the rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mumbling of the multitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so dire her fate as theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since her friend this gift declares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choicest of his birthday boons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleanor’s dear macaroons!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><i>February</i> 22, 1884.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="telepathy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Telepathy</h2>
			<p>
				<span>‘And how could you dream of meeting?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, how can you ask me, sweet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day my pulse had been beating</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tune of your coming feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as nearer and ever nearer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I felt the throb of your tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be in the world grew clearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my blood ran rosier red.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Love called, and I could not linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But sought the forbidden tryst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As music follows the finger</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the dreaming lutanist</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And though you had said it and said it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘We must not be happy to-day,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was I not wiser to credit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fire in my feet than your Nay?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="scherzo" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Scherzo</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When the down is on the chin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the gold-gleam in the hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the birds their sweethearts win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And champagne is in the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is here, and Love is there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is welcome everywhere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Summer’s cheek too soon turns thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days grow briefer, sunshine rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Autumn from his cannekin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows the froth to chase Despair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is met with frosty stare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot house ’neath branches bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When new life is in the leaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And new red is in the rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Love’s Maytlme be as brief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a dragon-fly’s repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never moments come like those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be they Heaven or Hell: who knows?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All too soon comes Winter’s grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spendthrift Love’s false friends turn foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Softly comes Old Age, the thief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steals the rapture, leaves the throes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love his mantle round him throws⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Time to say Good-by; it snows.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="franciscus-de-verulamio-sic-cogitavit" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">‘Franciscus de Verulamio Sic Cogitavit’</h2>
			<p>
				<span>That’s a rather bold speech, my Lord Bacon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, indeed, is’t so easy to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just how much we from others have taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how much our own natural flow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since your mind bubbled up at its fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How many streams made it elate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While it calmed to the plain from the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As every mind must that grows great?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While you thought ’twas You thinking as newly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Adam still wet with God’s dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You forgot in your self-pride that truly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The whole Past was thinking through you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Greece, Rome, nay, your namesake, old Roger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Truth’s nameless delvers who wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark mines of Truth, helped to prod your</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fine brain with the goad of their thought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As mummy was prized for a rich hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The painter no elsewhere could find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So ’twas buried men’s thinking with which you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave the ripe mellow tone to your mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I heard the proud strawberry saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Only look what a ruby I’ve made!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It forgot how the bees in their maying</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had brought it the stuff for its trade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet there’s the half of a truth in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my Lord might his copyright sue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a thought’s his who kindles new youth in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or so puts it as makes it more true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The birds but repeat without ending</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The same old traditional notes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which some, by more happily blending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seem to make over new in their throats;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And we men through our old bit of song run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until one just improves on the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we call a thing his, in the long run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who utters it clearest and best.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="auspex" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Auspex</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My heart, I cannot still it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nest that had song-birds in it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the last shall go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreary days, to fill it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of lark or linnet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall whirl dead leaves and snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had they been swallows only,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the passion stronger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That skyward longs and sings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe’s me, I shall be lonely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I can feel no longer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The impatience of their wings!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A moment, sweet delusion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like birds the brown leaves hover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it will not be long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before their wild confusion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall wavering down to cover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poet and his song.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-pregnant-comment" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Pregnant Comment</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Opening one day a book of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I absent, Hester found a line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praised with a pencil-mark, and this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She left transfigured with a kiss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When next upon the page I chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Poussin’s nymphs my pulses dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirl my fancy where it sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pan piping ’neath Arcadian trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose leaves no winter-scenes rehearse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still young and glad as Homer’s verse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘What mean,’ I ask, ‘these sudden joys?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This feeling fresher than a boy’s?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What makes this line, familiar long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New as the first bird’s April song?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could, with sense illumined thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear doubtful texts in Æeschylus!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Laughing, one day she gave the key,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My riddle’s open-sesame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then added, with a smile demure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose downcast lids veiled triumph sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘If what I left there give you pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You⁠—you⁠—can take it off again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas for <i>my</i> poet, not for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Your Doctor Donne there!’</span>
					<span>Earth grew dim</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wavered in a golden mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rose, not paper, leaves I kissed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Donne, you forgive? I let you keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her precious comment, poet deep.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lesson" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lesson</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I sat and watched the walls of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cracks of sudden lightning glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listened while with clumsy might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thunder wallowed to and fro.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rain fell softly now; the squall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That to a torrent drove the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had whirled beyond us to let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its tumult on the whitening seas.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But still the lightning crinkled keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fluttered fitful from behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaden drifts, then only seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That rumbled eastward on the wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still as gloom followed after glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While bated breath the pine-trees drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiny Salmoneus of the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mimic bolts the firefly threw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He thought, no doubt, ‘Those flashes grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That light for leagues the shuddering sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are made, a fool could understand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By some superior kind of fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘He’s of our race’s elder branch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His family-arms the same as ours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both born the twy-forked flame to launch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of kindred, if unequal, powers.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And is man wiser? Man who takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His consciousness the law to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all beyond his ken, and makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God but a bigger kind of Me?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="science-and-poetry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Science and Poetry</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He who first stretched his nerves of subtile wire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the land and through the sea-depths still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought only of the flame-winged messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a dull drudge that should encircle earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sordid messages of Trade, and tame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blithe Ariel to a bagman. But the Muse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long will be defrauded. From her foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her misused wand she snatches; at a touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Age of Wonder is renewed again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to our disenchanted day restores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Shoes of Swiftness that give odds to Thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloak that makes invisible; and with these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I glide, an airy fire, from shore to shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or from my Cambridge whisper to Cathay.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-new-years-greeting" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A New Year’s Greeting</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The century numbers fourscore years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You, fortressed in your teens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Time’s alarums close your ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, while he devastates your peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conceive not what he means.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If e’er life’s winter fleck with snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your hair’s deep shadowed bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That winsome head an art would know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make it charm, and wear it so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’twere a wreath of flowers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If to such fairies years must come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May yours fall soft and slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, shaken by a bee’s low hum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rose-leaves waver, sweetly dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to their mates below!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-discovery" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Discovery</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I watched a moorland torrent run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down through the rift itself had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden as honey in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of darkest amber in the shade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this wild glen at last, methought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The magic’s secret I surprise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Celia’s guardian fairy caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The changeful splendors of her eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All else grows tame, the sky’s one blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one long languish of the rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these, beyond prevision new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall charm and startle to the close.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="with-a-seashell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">With a Seashell</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Shell, whose lips, than mine more cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might with Dian’s ear make bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek my Lady’s; if thou win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that portal, shut from sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where commissioned angels’ swords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Startle back unholy words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou a miracle shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by it and wrought in thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, the dumb one, shalt recover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speech of poet, speech of lover.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If she deign to lift you there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmur what I may not dare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that archway, pearly-pink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the Dawn’s untrodden brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmur, ‘Excellent and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty’s best in every mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never common, never tame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changeful fair as windwaved flame’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, I maunder; this she hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every day with mocking ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a brow not sudden-stained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the flush of bliss restrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With no tremor of the pulse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than feels the dreaming dulse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the midmost ocean’s caves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a tempest heaps the waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must woo her in a phrase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mystic as the opal’s blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which pure maids alone can see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When their lovers constant be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I with thee a secret share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half a hope, and half a prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though no reach of mortal skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever told it all, or will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, ‘He bids me⁠—nothing more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell you what you guessed before!’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-secret" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Secret</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I have a fancy: how shall I bring it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to all mortals wherever they be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say it or sing it? Shoe it or wing it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So it may outrun or outfly <b>me</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merest cocoon-web whence it broke free?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only one secret can save from disaster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only one magic is that of the Master:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set it to music; give it a tune⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tune the brook sings you, tune the breeze brings you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tune the wild columbines nod to in June!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is the secret: so simple, you see!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easy as loving, easy as kissing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easy as⁠—well, let me ponder⁠—as missing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Known, since the world was, by scarce two or three.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fitz-adams-story" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fitz Adam’s Story</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The next whose fortune ’twas a tale to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was one whom men, before they thought, loved well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after thinking wondered why they did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For half he seemed to let them, half forbid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrapped him so in humors, sheath on sheath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas hard to guess the mellow soul beneath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, once divined, you took him to your heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he appeared to bear with you as part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life’s impertinence, and once a year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betrayed his true self by a smile or tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rather something sweetly shy and loath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrawn ere fully shown, and mixed of both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cynic? Not precisely: one who thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a heart too prone to love and trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who so despised false sentiment he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce in himself to part the false and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strove to hide, by roughening-o’er the skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those cobweb nerves he could not dull within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentle by birth, but of a stem decayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shunned life’s rivalries and hated trade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a small patrimony and larger pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lived uneaseful on the Other Side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(So he called Europe), only coming West</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give his Old-World appetite new zest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still the New World spooked it in his veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ghost he could not lay with all his pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never Pilgrims’ offshoot scapes control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those old instincts that have shaped his soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A radical in thought, he puffed away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shrewd contempt the dust of usage gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet loathed democracy as one who saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In what he longed to love, some vulgar flaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, shocked through all his delicate reserves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained a Tory by his taste and nerves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fancy’s thrall, he drew all ergoes thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought himself the type of common sense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misliking women, not from cross or whim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that his mother shared too much in him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he half felt that what in them was grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made the unlucky weakness of his race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What powers he had he hardly cared to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sauntered through the world as through a show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A critic fine in his haphazard way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sort of mild La Bruyère on half-pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For comic weaknesses he had an eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keen as an acid for an alkali,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet you could feel, through his sardonic tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved them all, unless they were his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You might have called him, with his humorous twist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kind of human entomologist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As these bring home, from every walk they take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hat-crowns stuck with bugs of curious make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he filled all the lining of his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With characters impaled and ticketed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had a cabinet behind his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all they caught of mortal oddities.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might have been a poet⁠—many worse⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that he had, or feigned, contempt of verse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called it tattooing language, and held rhymes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young world’s lullaby of ruder times.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter in words, too indolent for gall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He satirized himself the first of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In men and their affairs could find no law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was the ill logic that he thought he saw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Scratching a match to light his pipe anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyes half shut some musing whiffs he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus began: ‘I give you all my word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think this mock-Decameron absurd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boccaccio’s garden! how bring that to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our bleak clime save under double glass?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moral east-wind of New England life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would snip its gay luxuriance like a knife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mile-deep the glaciers brooded here, they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through æons numb; we feel their chill to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These foreign plants are but half-hardy still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Die on a south, and on a north wall chill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had we stayed Puritans! <i>They</i> had some heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Though whence derived I have my own conceit,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you have long ago raked up their fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they had faith, you’ve ten sham-Gothic spires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why more exotics? Try your native vines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in some thousand years you <i>may</i> have wines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your present grapes are harsh, all pulps and skins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And want traditions of ancestral bins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saved for evenings round the polished board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old lava fires, the sun-steeped hillside’s hoard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a Past, you lack that southern wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er which the vines of Poesy should crawl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still they’re your only hope: no midnight oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes up for virtue wanting in the soil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Manure them well and prune them; ’twon’t be France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Spain, nor Italy, but there’s your chance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have one story-teller worth a score</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dead Boccaccios⁠—nay, add twenty more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hawthorn asking spring’s most dainty breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him you’re freezing pretty well to death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However, since you say so, I will tease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My memory to a story by degrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though you will cry, “Enough!” I’m wellnigh sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I have dreamed through half my overture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stories were good for men who had no books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Fortunate race!) and built their nests like rooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lonely towers, to which the Jongleur brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pedler’s-box of cheap and tawdry thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With here and there a fancy fit to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought in quaint grace in golden filigree⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some ring that with the Muse’s finger yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is warm, like Aucassin and Nicolete;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning newspaper has spoilt his trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For better or for worse, I leave unsaid,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stories now, to suit a public nice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be half epigram, half pleasant vice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘All tourists know Shebagog County: there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer idlers take their yearly stare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dress to see Nature in a well-bred way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’twere Italian opera, or play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encore the sunrise (if they’re out of bed).</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pat the Mighty Mother on the head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These have I seen⁠—all things are good to see.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondered much at their complacency.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This world’s great show, that took in getting-up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Millions of years, they finish ere they sup;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sights that God gleams through with soul-tingling force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They glance approvingly as things of course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, “That’s a grand rock,” “This a pretty fall.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not thinking, “Are we worthy?” What if all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scornful landscape should turn round and say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is a fool, and that a popinjay”?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I often wonder what the Mountain thinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of French boots creaking o’er his breathless brinks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or how the Sun would scare the chattering crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If some fine day he chanced to think aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, who love Nature much as sinners can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love her where she most grandeur shows⁠—in man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here find I mountain, forest, cloud, and sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>River and sea, and glows when day is done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, where she makes grotesques, and moulds in jest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clown’s cheap clay, I find unfading zest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The natural instincts year by year retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As deer shrink northward from the settler’s fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who loves the wild game-flavor more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than city-feasts, where every man’s a bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every other man, must seek it where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steamer’s throb and railway’s iron blare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have not yet startled with their punctual stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shy, wood-wandering brood of Character.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘There is a village, once the county town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which the weekly mail rolled dustily down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the courts sat, it may be, twice a year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the one tavern reeked with rustic cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheeshogquesumscot erst, now Jethro hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red-man and pale-face bore it equal spite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The railway ruined it, the natives say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That passed unwisely fifteen miles away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made a drain to which, with steady ooze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filtered away law, stage-coach, trade, and news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The railway saved it: so at least think those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who love old ways, old houses, old repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of course the Tavern stayed: its genial host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought not of flitting more than did the post</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which high-hung the fading signboard creaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inscribed, “The Eagle Inn, by Ezra Weeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘If in life’s journey you should ever find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An inn medicinal for body and mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis sure to be some drowsy-looking house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose easy landlord has a bustling spouse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, if he like you, will not long forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some bottle deep in cobwebbed dust laid low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, since the War we used to call the “Last,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has dozed and held its lang-syne memories fast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him exhales that Indian-summer air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hazy, lazy welcome everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While with her toil the napery is white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The china dustless, the keen knife-blades bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salt dry as sand, and bread that seems as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere rather sea-foam baked than vulgar dough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘In our swift country, houses trim and white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are pitched like tents, the lodging of a night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each on its bank of baked turf mounted high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perches impatient o’er the roadside dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the wronged landscape coldly stands aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refusing friendship with the upstart roof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so the Eagle; on a grass-green swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That toward the south with sweet concessions fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It dwelt retired, and half had grown to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As aboriginal as rock or tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It nestled close to earth, and seemed to brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er homely thoughts in a half-conscious mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As by the peat that rather fades than burns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smouldering grandam nods and knits by turns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy, although her newest news were old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the first hostile drum at Concord rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If paint it e’er had known, it knew no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than yellow lichens spattered thickly o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That soft lead-gray, less dark beneath the eaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the slow brush of wind and weather leaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ample roof sloped backward to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vassal lean-tos gathered thickly round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patched on, as sire or son had felt the need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like chance growths sprouting from the old roofs seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as about a yellow-pine-tree spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its rough-barked darlings in a filial ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the great chimney was the central thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose gravitation through the cluster wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ’tis not styles far-fetched from Greece or Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But just the Fireside, that can make a home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None of your spindling things of modern style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like pins stuck through to stay the card-built pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It rose broad-shouldered, kindly, debonair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its warm breath whitening in the October air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While on its front a heart in outline showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place it filled in that serene abode.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘When first I chanced the Eagle to explore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ezra sat listless by the open door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One chair careened him at an angle meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another nursed his hugely slippered feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a third reposed a shirt-sleeved arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the whole man diffused tobacco’s charm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Are you the landlord?” “Wahl, I guess I be,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the smoke he answered leisurely.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a stoutish man, and through the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his loose shirt there showed a brambly chest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streaked redly as a wind-foreboding morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tanned cheeks curved to temples closely shorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clean-shaved he was, save where a hedge of gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his brawny throat leaned every way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About an Adam’s-apple, that beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bulged like a boulder from a brambly heath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Western World’s true child and nursling he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equipt with aptitudes enough for three:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No eye like his to value horse or cow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or gauge the contents of a stack or mow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could foretell the weather at a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew the haunt of every beast and bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or where a two-pound trout was sure to lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting the flutter of his homemade fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, once in autumns five, he had the luck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drop at fair-play range a ten-tined buck;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sportsmen true he favored every whim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never cockney found a guide in him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A natural man, with all his instincts fresh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not buzzing helpless in Reflection’s mesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm on its feet stood his broad-shouldered mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As bluffly honest as a northwest wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard-headed and soft-hearted, you’d scarce meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kindlier mixture of the shrewd and sweet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Generous by birth, and ill at saying “No,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in a bargain he was all men’s foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would yield no inch of vantage in a trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give away ere nightfall all he made.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“ ‘Can I have lodging here?’ once more I said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He blew a whiff, and, leaning back his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You come a piece through Bailey’s woods, I s’pose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acrost a bridge where a big swamp-oak grows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It don’t grow, neither; it’s ben dead ten year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor th’ ain’t a livin’ creetur, fur nor near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can tell wut killed it; but I some misdoubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas borers, there’s sech heaps on ’em about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You didn’ chance to run ag’inst my son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long, slab-sided youngster with a gun?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d oughto ben back more ‘n an hour ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ brought some birds to dress for supper⁠—sho!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There he comes now. ‘Say, Obed, wut ye got?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(He’ll hev some upland plover like as not.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wal, them’s real nice uns, an’ll eat A 1,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ef I can stop their bein’ overdone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothin’ riles <i>me</i> (I pledge my fastin’ word)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like cookin’ out the natur’ of a bird;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Obed, you pick ’em out o’ sight an’ sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your ma’am don’t love no feathers cluttrin’ round;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jes’ scare ’em with the coals⁠—thet’s <i>my</i> idee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, turning suddenly about on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wal, Square, I guess so. Callilate to stay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll ask Mis’ Weeks; ‘bout <i>thet</i> it’s hern to say.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Well, there I lingered all October through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that sweet atmosphere of hazy blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So leisurely, so soothing, so forgiving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sometimes makes New England fit for living.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watched the landscape, erst so granite glum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bloom like the south side of a ripening plum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each rock-maple on the hillside make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ten days’ sunset doubled in the lake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very stone walls draggling up the hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed touched, and wavered in their roundhead wills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! there’s a deal of sugar in the sun!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tap me in Indian summer, I should run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A juice to make rock-candy of⁠—but then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We get such weather scarce one year in ten.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘There was a parlor in the house, a room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make you shudder with its prudish gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The furniture stood round with such an air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There seemed an old maid’s ghost in every chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which looked as it had scuttled to its place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pulled extempore a Sunday face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too smugly proper for a world of sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like boys on whom the minister comes in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table, fronting you with icy stare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strove to look witless that its legs were bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the black sofa with its horse-hair pall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloomed like a bier for Comfort’s funeral.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each piece appeared to do its chilly best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seem an utter stranger to the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if acquaintanceship were deadly sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Britons meeting in a foreign inn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two portraits graced the wall in grimmest truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mister and Mistress W. in their youth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New England youth, that seems a sort of pill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half wish-I-dared, half Edwards on the Will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter to swallow, and which leaves a trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Calvinistic colic on the face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between them, o’er the mantel, hung in state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solomon’s temple, done in copperplate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invention pure, but meant, we may presume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give some Scripture sanction to the room.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Facing this last, two samplers you might see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each, with its urn and stiffly weeping tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoted to some memory long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More faded than their lines of worsted woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut paper decked their frames against the flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though none e’er dared an entrance who were wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bushed asparagus in fading green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added its shiver to the franklin clean.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘When first arrived, I chilled a half-hour there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dared deflower with use a single chair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I caught no cold, yet flying pains could find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For weeks in me⁠—a rheumatism of mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One thing alone imprisoned there had power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hold me in the place that long half-hour:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A scutcheon this, a helm-surmounted shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three griffins argent on a sable field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A relic of the shipwrecked past was here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ezra held some Old-World lumber dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, do not smile; I love this kind of thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These cooped traditions with a broken wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This freehold nook in Fancy’s pipe-blown ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This less than nothing that is more than all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I not seen sweet natures kept alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the humdrum of your business hive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undowered spinsters shielded from all harms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By airy incomes from a coat of arms?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He paused a moment, and his features took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flitting sweetness of that inward look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hinted at before; but, scarcely seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shrank for shelter ’neath his harder mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rapping his black pipe of ashes clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went on with a self-derisive sneer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘No doubt we make a part of God’s design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And break the forest-path for feet divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To furnish foothold for this grand prevision</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is good, and yet⁠—to be the mere transition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, you will say, is also good, though I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce like to feed the ogre By-and-By.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raw edges rasp my nerves; my taste is wooed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By things that are, not going to be, good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though were I what I dreamed two lustres gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d stay to help the Consummation on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether a new Rome than the old more fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a deadflat of rascal-ruled despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But <i>my</i> skull somehow never closed the suture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seems to knit yours firmly with the future,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So you’ll excuse me if I’m sometimes fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tie the Past’s warm nightcap o’er my brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m quite aware ’tis not in fashion here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then your northeast winds are <i>so</i> severe!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘But to my story: though ’tis truly naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a few hints in Memory’s sketchbook caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which may claim a value on the score</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of calling back some scenery now no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I confess? The tavern’s only Lar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed (be not shocked!) its homely-featured bar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here dozed a fire of beechen logs, that bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange fancies in its embers golden-red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nursed the loggerhead whose hissing dip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Timed by nice instinct, creamed the mug of flip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made from mouth to mouth its genial round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor left one nature wholly winter-bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence dropt the tinkling coal all mellow-ripe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Uncle Reuben’s talk-extinguished pipe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence rayed the heat, as from an indoor sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wooed forth many a shoot of rustic fun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Ezra ruled as king by right divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other face had such a wholesome shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No laugh like his so full of honest cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the rest it crowed like Chanticleer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘In this one room his dame you never saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where reigned by custom old a Salic law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here coatless lolled he on his throne of oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every tongue paused midway if he spoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due mirth he loved, yet was his sway severe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No blear-eyed driveller got his stagger here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Measure was happiness; who wanted more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must buy his ruin at the Deacon’s store;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None but his lodgers after ten could stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor after nine on eves of Sabbath-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had his favorites and his pensioners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same that gypsy Nature owns for hers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose-ended souls, whose skills bring scanty gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whom the poor-house catches when they’re old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rude country-minstrels, men who doctor kine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or graft, and, out of scions ten, save nine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creatures of genius they, but never meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep step with the civic regiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These Ezra welcomed, feeling in his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps some motions of the vagrant kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These paid no money, yet for them he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Special Jamaica from a tap they knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for their feelings, chalked behind the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solemn face a visionary score.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This thawed to life in Uncle Reuben’s throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A torpid shoal of jest and anecdote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those queer fish that doze the droughts away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait for moisture, wrapped in sun-baked clay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This warmed the one-eyed fiddler to his task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perched in the corner on an empty cask,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By whose shrill art rapt suddenly, some boor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rattled a double-shuffle on the floor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hull’s Victory” was, indeed, the favorite air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though “Yankee Doodle” claimed its proper share.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘ ’Twas there I caught from Uncle Reuben’s lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dribbling monologue ’twixt whiffs and sips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story I so long have tried to tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The humor coarse, the persons common⁠—well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Nature only do I love to paint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether she send a satyr or a saint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me Sincerity’s the one thing good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soiled though she be and lost to maidenhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quompegan is a town some ten miles south</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Jethro, at Nagumscot river-mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seaport town, and makes its title good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lumber and dried fish and eastern wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Deacon Bitters dwelt and kept the Store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The richest man for many a mile of shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In little less than everything dealt he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From meeting-houses to a chest of tea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dextrous therewithal a flint to skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could make profit on a single pin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In business strict, to bring the balance true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had been known to bite a fig in two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And change a board-nail for a shingle-nail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that he had he ready held for sale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His house, his tomb, whate’er the law allows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he had gladly parted with his spouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His one ambition still to get and get,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would arrest your very ghost for debt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His store looked righteous, should the Parson come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in a dark back-room he peddled rum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eased Ma’am Conscience, if she e’er would scold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By christening it with water ere he sold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A small, dry man he was, who wore a queue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one white neckcloth all the week-days through⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Monday white, by Saturday as dun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that worn homeward by the prodigal son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His frosted earlocks, striped with foxy brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were braided up to hide a desert crown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coat was brownish, black perhaps of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In summer-time a banyan loose he wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His trousers short, through many a season true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made no pretence to hide his stockings blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A waistcoat buff his chief adornment was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its porcelain buttons rimmed with dusky brass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deacon he, you saw it in each limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well he knew to deacon-off a hymn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lead the choir through all its wandering woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With voice that gathered unction in his nose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein a constant snuffle you might hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if with him ’twere winter all the year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At pew-head sat he with decorous pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sermon-time could foot his weekly gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, with closed eyes and heaven-abstracted air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could plan a new investment in long-prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pious man, and thrifty too, he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The psalms and prophets partners in his trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his orthodoxy straitened more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it enlarged the business at his store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He honored Moses, but, when gain he planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had his own notion of the Promised Land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Soon as the winter made the sledding good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From far around the farmers hauled him wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the trade had gathered ’neath his thumb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He paid in groceries and New England rum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making two profits with a conscience clear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheap all he bought, and all he paid with dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his own mete-wand measuring every load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each somehow had diminished on the road;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An honest cord in Jethro still would fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a good foot upon the Deacon’s scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, more to abate the price, his gimlet eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would pierce to cat-sticks that none else could spy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet none dared grumble, for no farmer yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But New Year found him in the Deacon’s debt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘While the first snow was mealy under feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A team drawled creaking down Quompegan street.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two cords of oak weighed down the grinding sled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cornstalk fodder rustled overhead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oxen’s muzzles, as they shouldered through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were silver-fringed; the driver’s own was blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the coarse frock that swung below his knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind his load for shelter waded he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mittened hands now on his chest he beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now stamped the stiffened cowhides of his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hushed as a ghost’s; his armpit scarce could hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walnut whipstock slippery-bright with cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wonder if, the tavern as he past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked and longed, and stayed his beasts at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who patient stood and veiled themselves in steam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he explored the bar-room’s ruddy gleam?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘Before the fire, in want of thought profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There sat a brother-townsman weather-bound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sturdy churl, crisp-headed, bristly-eared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red as a pepper; ’twixt coarse brows and beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes lay ambushed, on the watch for fools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear, gray, and glittering like two bay-edged pools;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shifty creature, with a turn for fun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could swap a poor horse for a better one⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d a high-stepper always in his stall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Liked far and near, and dreaded therewithal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him the in-comer, “Perez, how d’ ye do?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Jest as I’m mind to, Obed; how do you?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, his eyes twinkling such swift gleams as run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the levelled barrel of a gun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought to his shoulder by a man you know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bring his game down, he continued, “So,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I s’pose you’re haulin’ wood? But you’re too late;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Deacon’s off; Old Splitfoot couldn’t wait;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made a bee-line las’ night in the storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where he won’t need wood to keep him warm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Fore this he’s treasurer of a fund to train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young imps as missionaries; hopes to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That way a contract that he has in view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fireproof pitchforks of a pattern new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It must have tickled him, all drawbacks weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think he stuck the Old One in a trade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul, to start with, wasn’t worth a carrot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all he’d left ‘ould hardly serve to swear at.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘By this time Obed had his wits thawed out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, looking at the other half in doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took off his fox-skin cap to scratch his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Donned it again, and drawled forth, “Mean he’s dead?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Jesso; he’s dead and t’other <i>d</i> that follers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With folks that never love a thing but dollars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pulled up stakes last evening, fair and square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever since there’s been a row Down There.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minute the old chap arrived, you see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes the Boss-devil to him, and says he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘What are you good at? Little enough, I fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We callilate to make folks useful here.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Well,’ says old Bitters, ‘I expect I can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scale a fair load of wood with e’er a man.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Wood we don’t deal in; but perhaps you’ll suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because we buy our brimstone by the foot:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, take this measurin’-rod, as smooth as sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep a reckonin’ of what loads comes in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll not want business, for we need a lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep the Yankees that you send us hot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At firin’ up they’re barely half as spry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Spaniards or Italians, though they’re dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first we have to let the draught on stronger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, heat ’em through, they seem to hold it longer.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Bitters he took the rod, and pretty soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A teamster comes, whistling an ex-psalm tune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A likelier chap you wouldn’t ask to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No different, but his limp, from you or me”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No different, Perez! Don’t your memory fail?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, where in thunder was his horns and tail?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They’re only worn by some old-fashioned pokes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mostly aim at looking just like folks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sech things are scarce as queues and top-boots here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould spoil their usefulness to look too queer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ef you could always know ’em when they come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’d get no purchase on you: now be mum.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On come the teamster, smart as Davy Crockett,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jinglin’ the red-hot coppers in his pocket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clost behind, (’twas gold-dust, you’d ha’ sworn,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A load of sulphur yallower ‘n seed-corn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see it wasted as it is Down There</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would make a Friction-Match Co. tear its hair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hold on!’ says Bitters, ‘stop right where you be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can’t go in athout a pass from me.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘All right,’ says t’other, ‘only step round smart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must be home by noon-time with the cart.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitters goes round it sharp-eyed as a rat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with a scrap of paper on his hat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pretends to cipher. ‘By the public staff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That load scarce rises twelve foot and a half.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘There’s fourteen foot and over,’ says the driver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Worth twenty dollars, ef it’s worth a stiver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good fourth-proof brimstone, that’ll make ’em squirm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leave it to the Headman of the Firm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After we masure it, we always lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some on to allow for settlin’ by the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imp and full-grown, I’ve carted sulphur here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gi’n fair satisfaction, thirty year.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that they fell to quarrellin’ so loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in five minutes they had drawed a crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And afore long the Boss, who heard the row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes elbowin’ in with ‘What’s to pay here now?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both parties heard, the measurin’-rod he takes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the load a careful survey makes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sence I have bossed the business here,’ says he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘No fairer load was ever seen by me.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, turnin’ to the Deacon, ‘You mean cus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None of your old Quompegan tricks with us!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They won’t do here: we’re plain old-fashioned folks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And don’t quite understand that kind o’ jokes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know this teamster, and his pa afore him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hard-working Mrs. D. that bore him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldn’t soil his conscience with a lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he might get the custom-house thereby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, constable, take Bitters by the queue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clap him into furnace ninety-two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And try this brimstone on him; if he’s bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll find the masure honest afore night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He isn’t worth his fuel, and I’ll bet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parish oven has to take him yet!’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">‘This is my tale, heard twenty years ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Uncle Reuben, as the logs burned low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touching the walls and ceiling with that bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes a rose’s calyx of a room.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not give his language, wherethrough ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gamy flavor of the bookless man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shapes a word before the fancy cools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lonely Crusoe improvised his tools.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I liked the tale⁠—’twas like so many told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Rutebeuf and his Brother Trouvères bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor were the hearers much unlike to theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men unsophisticate, rude-nerved as bears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ezra is gone and his large-hearted kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The landlords of the hospitable mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good Warriner of Springfield was the last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An inn is now a vision of the past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One yet-surviving host my mind recalls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll find him if you go to Trenton Falls.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-origin-of-didactic-poetry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Origin of Didactic Poetry</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When wise Minerva still was young</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And just the least romantic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon after from Jove’s head she flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That preternatural antic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis said, to keep from idleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or flirting, those twin curses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spent her leisure, more or less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In writing po⁠—, no, verses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How nice they were! to rhyme with <i>far</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A kind <i>star</i> did not tarry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The metre, too, was regular</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As schoolboy’s dot and carry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full they were of pious plums,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So extra-super-moral⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sucking Virtue’s tender gums</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most tooth-enticing coral.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A clean, fair copy she prepares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes sure of moods and tenses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her own hand⁠—for prudence spares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A man-(or woman-)-uensis;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complete, and tied with ribbons proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She hinted soon how cosy a</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treat it would be to read them loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After next day’s Ambrosia.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Gods thought not it would amuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much as Homer’s Odyssees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But could not very well refuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The properest of Goddesses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So all sat round in attitudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of various dejection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with a <i>hem!</i> the queen of prudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began her grave prelection.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At the first pause Zeus said, ‘Well sung!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I mean⁠—ask Phoebus⁠—<i>he</i> knows.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says Phoebus, ‘Zounds! a wolf’s among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admetus’s merinos!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine! very fine! but I must go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They stand in need of me there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excuse me!’ snatched his stick, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunged down the gladdened ether.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With the next gap, Mars said, ‘For me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Don’t wait⁠—naught could be finer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’m engaged at half past three⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fight in Asia Minor!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Venus lisped, ‘I’m sorely tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These duty-calls are vip’rous;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I <i>must</i> go; I have a bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see about in Cyprus.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Bacchus⁠—‘I must say good-by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although my peace it jeopards;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I meet a man at four, to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A well-broke pair of leopards.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His words woke Hermes. ‘Ah!’ he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘I <i>so</i> love moral theses!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then winked at Hebe, who turned red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smoothed her apron’s creases.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Just then Zeus snored⁠—the Eagle drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His head the wing from under;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeus snored⁠—o’er startled Greece there flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The many-volumed thunder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some augurs counted nine, some, ten;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some said ’twas war, some, famine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all, that other-minded men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would get a precious⁠—.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Proud Pallas sighed, ‘It will not do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the Muse I’ve sinned, oh!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her torn rhymes sent flying through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympus’s back window.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, packing up a peplus clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She took the shortest path thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opened, with a mind serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Sunday-school in Athens.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The verses? Some in ocean swilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Killed every fish that bit to ’em;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some Galen caught, and, when distilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found morphine the residuum;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But some that rotted on the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprang up again in copies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave two strong narcotics birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didactic verse and poppies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Years after, when a poet asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Goddess’s opinion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one whose soul its wings had tasked</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Art’s clear-aired dominion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Discriminate,’ she said, ‘betimes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Muse is unforgiving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put all your beauty in your rhymes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your morals in your living.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-flying-dutchman" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Flying Dutchman</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Don’t believe in the Flying Dutchman?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ve known the fellow for years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My button I’ve wrenched from his clutch, man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shudder whenever he nears!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He’s a Rip van Winkle skipper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Wandering Jew of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sails his bedevilled old clipper</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the wind’s eye, straight as a bee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Back topsails! you can’t escape him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The man-ropes stretch with his weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the queerest old toggeries drape him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lord knows how long out of date!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Like a long-disembodied idea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(A kind of ghost plentiful now,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stands there; you fancy you see a</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Coeval of Teniers or Douw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He greets you; would have you take letters:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You scan the addresses with dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he mutters his <i>donners</i> and <i>wetters</i>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They’re all from the dead to the dead!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You seem taking time for reflection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the heart fills your throat with a jam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you spell in each faded direction</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An ominous ending in <i>dam</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Am I tagging my rhymes to a legend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That were changing green turtle to mock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, thank you! I’ve found out which wedge-end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is meant for the head of a block.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fellow I have in my mind’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plays the old Skipper’s part here on shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sticks like a burr, till he finds I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have got just the gauge of his bore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This postman ‘twist one ghost and t’other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With last dates that smell of the mould,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have met him (O man and brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgive me!) in azure and gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the pulpit I’ve known of his preaching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of hearing behind the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some statement of Balaam’s impeaching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Giving Eve a due sense of her crime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have seen him some poor ancient thrashing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into something (God save us!) more dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Water of Life itself washing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The life out of earth, sea, and sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O dread fellow-mortal, get newer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Despatches to carry, or none!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’re as quick as the Greek and the Jew were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At knowing a loaf from a stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till the couriers of God fail in duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We sha’n’t ask a mummy for news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor sate the soul’s hunger for beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With your drawings from casts of a Muse.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="credidimus-jovem-regnare" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Credidimus Jovem Regnare</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O days endeared to every Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When nobody had any Views,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, while the cloudscape of his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By every breeze was new designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insisted all the world should see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camels or whales where none there be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O happy days, when men received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sire to son what all believed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left the other world in bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too busy with bedevilling this!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beset by doubts of every breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the last bastion of my creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shot and shell for Sabbath-chime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watch the storming-party climb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Panting (their prey in easy reach),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pour triumphant through the breach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In walls that shed like snowflakes tons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of missiles from old-fashioned guns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But crumble ’neath the storm that pours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day and night from bigger bores.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as I hopeless watch and wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last life-crushing coil of Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despair finds solace in the praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those serene dawn-rosy days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere microscopes had made us heirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To large estates of doubts and snares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By proving that the title-deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once all-sufficient for men’s needs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are palimpsests that scarce disguise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tracings of still earlier lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves as surely written o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An older fib erased before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So from these days I fly to those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the landlocked Past repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where no rude wind of doctrine shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bloom-flushed boughs untimely flakes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where morning’s eyes see nothing strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No crude perplexity of change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And morrows trip along their ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secure as happy yesterdays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then there were rulers who could trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through heroes up to gods their race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pledged to fair fame and noble use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By veins from Odin filled or Zeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under bonds to keep divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The praise of a celestial line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then priests could pile the altar’s sods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom gods spake as they with gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everywhere from haunted earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke springs of wonder, that had birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In depths divine beyond the ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fatal scrutiny of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then hills and groves and streams and seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled with immortal presences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not too ethereal for the scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human passion’s dream or hope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now Pan at last is surely dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And King No-Credit reigns instead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose officers, morosely strict,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Fancy’s tenantry evict,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chase the last Genius from the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing dances any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing? Ah, yes, our tables do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dramming the Old One’s own tattoo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if the oracles are dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have we not mediums! Why be glum?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fly thither? Why, the very air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is full of hindrance and despair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly thither? But I cannot fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My doubts enmesh me if I try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each Liliputian, but, combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Potent a giant’s limbs to bind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This world and that are growing dark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge interrogation mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Devil’s crook episcopal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still borne before him since the Fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blackens with its ill-omened sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old blue heaven of faith benign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence? Whither? Wherefore? How? Which? Why?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ask at once, all wait reply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men feel old systems cracking under ’em;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life saddens to a mere conundrum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which once Religion solved, but she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has lost⁠—has Science found?⁠—the key.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What was snow-bearded Odin, trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty hunter long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose horn and hounds the peasant hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still when the Northlights shake their spears?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Science hath answers twain, I’ve heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose which you will, nor hope a third;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whichever box the truth be stowed in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s not a sliver left of Odin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either he was a pinchbrowed thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With scarcely wit a stone to fling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A creature both in size and shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer than we are to the ape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hung sublime with brat and spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By tail prehensile from the boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, happier than his maimed descendants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The culture-curtailed _in_dependents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could pluck his cherries with both paws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stuff with both his big-boned jaws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else the core his name enveloped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was from a solar myth developed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, hunted to its primal shoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes refuge in a Sanskrit root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereby to instant death explaining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little poetry remaining.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Try it with Zeus, ’tis just the same;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thing evades, we hug a name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, scarcely that⁠—perhaps a vapor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of some atmospheric caper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Lempriere’s fables blur together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In cloudy symbols of the weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aphrodite rose from frothy seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to illustrate such hypotheses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With years enough behind his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln will take the selfsame track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prove, hulled fairly to the cob,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mere vagary of Old Prob.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the right man a solar myth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he’ll confute the sun therewith.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They make things admirably plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one hard question <i>will</i> remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If one hypothesis you lose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another in its place you choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, your faith gone, O man and brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose shop shall furnish you another?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One that will wash, I mean, and wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrap us warmly from despair?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While they are clearing up our puzzles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clapping prophylactic muzzles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Actæon’s hounds that sniff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our devious track through But and If,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would they’d explain away the Devil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other facts that won’t keep level,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rise beneath our feet or fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A reeling ship’s deck in a gale!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God vanished long ago, iwis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mere subjective synthesis;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A doll, stuffed out with hopes and fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too homely for us pretty dears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who want one that conviction carries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last make of London or of Paris.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gone, I felt a moment’s spasm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But calmed myself, with Protoplasm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A finer name, and, what is more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As enigmatic as before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greek, too, and sure to fill with ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minds caught in the Symplegades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of soul and sense, life’s two conditions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each baffled with its own omniscience.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who labor to revise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Bibles will, I hope, be wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And print it without foolish qualms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of God in David’s psalms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noll had been more effective far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could he have shouted at Dunbar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Rise, Protoplasm!’ No dourest Scot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had waited for another shot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet I frankly must confess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A secret unforgivingness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shudder at the saving chrism</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose best New Birth is Pessimism;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul⁠—I mean the bit of phosphorus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fills the place of what that was for us⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can’t bid its inward bores defiance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the new nursery-tales of science.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What profits me, though doubt by doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As nail by nail, be driven out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When every new one, like the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still holds my coffin-lid as fast?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would I find thought a moment’s truce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me the young world’s Mother Goose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With life and joy in every limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chimney-corner tales of Grimm!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our dear and admirable Huxley</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot explain to me why ducks lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, rather, how into their eggs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blunder potential wings and legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With will to move them and decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether in air or lymph to glide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gets a hair’s-breadth on by showing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Something Else set all agoing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farther and farther back we push</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Moses and his burning bush;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry, ‘Art Thou there?’ Above, below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Nature mutters <i>yes</i> and <i>no!</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the old answer: we’re agreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being from Being must proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life be Life’s source. I might as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obey the meeting-house’s bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listen while Old Hundred pours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth through the summer-opened doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From old and young. I hear it yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swelled by bass-viol and clarinet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the gray minister, with face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Radiant, let loose his noble bass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Heaven it reached not, yet its roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waked all the echoes of the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in it many a life found wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To soar away from sordid things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Church gone and singers too, the song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings to me voiceless all night long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till my soul beckons me afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowing and trembling like a star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will any scientific touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my worn strings achieve as much?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I don’t object, not I, to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sires were monkeys, if ’twas so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I touch my ear’s collusive tip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And own the poor-relationship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That apes of various shapes and sizes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contained their germs that all the prizes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of senate, pulpit, camp, and bar win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May give us hopes that sweeten Darwin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knows but from our loins may spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Long hence) some winged sweet-throated thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As much superior to us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we to Cynocephalus?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is consoling, but, alas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wipes no dimness from the glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I am flattening my poor nose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope to see beyond my toes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I accept my pedigree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet where, pray tell me, is the key</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should unlock a private door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Great Mystery, such no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each offers his, but one nor all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are much persuasive with the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rises now as long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between I wonder and I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will vouchsafe a pin-hole peep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the veiled Isis in its keep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is no door, I but produce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My key to find it of no use.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet better keep it, after all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Nature’s economical,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who can tell but some fine day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(If it occur to her) she may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her good-will to you and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Make</i> door and lock to match the key?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="tempora-mutantur" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tempora Mutantur</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The world turns mild; democracy, they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rounds the sharp knobs of character away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no great harm, unless at grave expense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what needs edge of proof, the moral sense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For man or race is on the downward path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose fibre grows too soft for honest wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there’s a subtle influence that springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From words to modify our sense of things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plain distinction grows obscure of late:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man, if he will, may pardon; but the State</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgets its function if not fixed as Fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thought our sires: a hundred years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If men were knaves, why, people called them so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crime could see the prison-portal bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its brow severe at no long vista’s end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those days for plain things plain words would serve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men had not learned to admire the graceful swerve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith the Æsthetic Nature’s genial mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes public duty slope to private good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No muddled conscience raised the saving doubt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soldier proved unworthy was drummed out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An officer cashiered, a civil servant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(No matter though his piety were fervent)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disgracefully dismissed, and through the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each bore for life a stigma from the brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose far-heard hiss made others more averse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the facile step from bad to worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ten Commandments had a meaning then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt in their bones by least considerate men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because behind them Public Conscience stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And without wincing made their mandates good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now that ‘Statesmanship’ is just a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dodge the primal curse and make it pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since office means a kind of patent drill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To force an entrance to the Nation’s till,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peculation something rather less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Risky than if you spelt it with an <i>s</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now that to steal by law is grown an art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom rogues the sires, their milder sons call smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ‘slightly irregular’ dilutes the shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what had once a somewhat blunter name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With generous curve we draw the moral line:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our swindlers are permitted to resign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their guilt is wrapped in deferential names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twenty sympathize for one that blames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Add national disgrace to private crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confront mankind with brazen front sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steal but enough, the world is un-severe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tweed is a statesman, Fisk a financier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invent a mine, and he⁠—the Lord knows what;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secure, at any rate, with what you’ve got.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The public servant who has stolen or lied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If called on, may resign with honest pride:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As unjust favor put him in, why doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disfavor as unjust has turned him out?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even it indicted, what is that but fudge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him who counted-in the elective judge?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whitewashed, he quits the politician’s strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At ease in mind, with pockets filled for life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ‘lady’ glares with gems whose vulgar blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor man through his heightened taxes pays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself content if one huge Kohinoor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bulge from a shirt-front ampler than before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not too candid, lest it haply tend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rouse suspicion of the People’s Friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A public meeting, treated at his cost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resolves him back more virtue than he lost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With character regilt he counts his gains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s gone was air, the solid good remains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what is good, except what friend and foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem quite unanimous in thinking so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stocks and bonds which, in our age of loans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replace the stupid pagan’s stocks and stones?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With choker white, wherein no cynic eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dares see idealized a hempen tie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At parish-meetings he conducts in prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pays for missions to be sent elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ‘Change respected, to his friends endeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Add but a Sunday-school class, he’s revered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his too early tomb will not be dumb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To point a moral for our youth to come.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-the-half-way-house" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In the Half-Way House</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At twenty we fancied the blest Middle Ages</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A spirited cross of romantic and grand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All templars and minstrels and ladies and pages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love and adventure in Outre-Mer land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah, where the youth dreamed of building a minster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man takes a pew and sits reckoning his pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Graces wear fronts, the Muse thins to a spinster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Middle-Age stares from one’s glass at oneself!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Do you twit me with days when I had an Ideal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the sear future through spectacles green?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then find me some charm, while I look round and see all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These fat friends of forty, shall keep me nineteen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should we go on pining for chaplets of laurel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who’ve paid a perruquier for mending our thatch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, our feet swathed in baize, with our Fate pick a quarrel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If, instead of cheap bay-leaves, she sent a dear scratch?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We called it our Eden, that small patent-baker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When life was half moonshine and half Mary Jane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the butcher, the baker, the candlestick-maker!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did Adam have duns and slip down a back-lane?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, after the Fall did the modiste keep coming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the last styles of fig-leaf to Madam Eve’s bower?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Jubal, or whoever taught the girls thrumming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make the patriarchs deaf at a dollar the hour?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As I think what I was, I sigh <i>Desunt nonnulla!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Years are creditors Sheridan’s self could not bilk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then, as my boy says, ‘What right has a fullah</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ask for the cream, when himself spilt the milk?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps when you’re older, my lad, you’ll discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret with which Auld Lang Syne there is gilt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Superstition of old man, maid, poet, and lover⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cream rises thickest on milk that was spilt!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We sailed for the moon, but, in sad disillusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snug under Point Comfort are glad to make fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strive (sans our glasses) to make a confusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt our rind of green cheese and the moon of the past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Might-have-been, Could-have-been, Would-have-been! rascals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He’s a genius or fool whom ye cheat at two-score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the man whose boy-promise was likened to Pascal’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is thankful at forty they don’t call him bore!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With what fumes of fame was each confident pate full!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How rates of insurance should rise on the Charles!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And which of us now would not feel wisely grateful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If his rhymes sold as fast as the Emblems of Quarles?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en if won, what’s the good of Life’s medals and prizes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rapture’s in what never was or is gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we missed them makes Helens of plain Ann Elizys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the goose of To-day still is Memory’s swan.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And yet who would change the old dream for new treasure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make not youth’s sourest grapes the best wine of our life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Need he reckon his date by the Almanac’s measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is twenty life-long in the eyes of his wife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Fate, should I live to be nonagenarian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me still take Hope’s frail I.O.U.’s upon trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still talk of a trip to the Islands Macarian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still climb the dream-tree for⁠—ashes and dust!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="at-the-burns-centennial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">At the Burns Centennial</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">January, 1859</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A hundred years! they’re quickly fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their joy and sorrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dead leaves shed upon the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fresh ones sprung by morrow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the patient seasons bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their change of sun and shadow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New birds still sing with every spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New violets spot the meadow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A hundred years! and Nature’s powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No greater grown nor lessened!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saw no flowers more sweet than ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No fairer new moon’s crescent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would she but treat us poets so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from our winter free us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set our slow old sap aflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sprout in fresh ideas!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas, think I, what worth or parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have brought me here competing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak what starts in myriad hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Burns’s memory beating!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself had loved a theme like this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must I be its entomber?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No pen save his but’s sure to miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its pathos or its humor.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As I sat musing what to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how my verse to number,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some elf in play passed by that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sank my lids in slumber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on my sleep a vision stole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I will put in metre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Burns’s soul at the wicket-hole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sits the good Saint Peter.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The saint, methought, had left his post</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day to Holy Willie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who swore, ‘Each ghost that comes shall toast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brunstane, will he, nill he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s nane need hope with phrases fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their score to wipe a sin frae;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll chalk a sign, to save their tryin’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hand ([Illustration of a hand]) and “<i>Vide infra!</i>” ’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! no soil’s too cold or dry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For spiritual small potatoes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scrimped natures, spry the trade to ply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of <i>diaboli advocatus</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lay bent pins in the penance-stool</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Mercy plumps a cushion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who’ve just one rule for knave and fool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It saves so much confusion!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So when Burns knocked, Will knit his brows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His window gap made scanter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, ‘Go rouse the other house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We lodge no Tam O’Shanter!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘<i>We</i> lodge!’ laughed Burns. ‘Now well I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death cannot kill old nature;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No human flea but thinks that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May speak for his Creator!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘But, Willie, friend, don’t turn me forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Auld Clootie needs no gauger;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if on earth I had small worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You’ve let in worse I’se wager!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Na, nane has knockit at the yett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But found me hard as whunstane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s chances yet your bread to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wi Auld Nick, gaugin’ brunstane.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile, the Unco’ Guid had ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their place to watch the process,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flattening in vain on many a pane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their disembodied noses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember, please, ’tis all a dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One can’t control the fancies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through sleep that stream with wayward gleam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like midnight’s boreal dances.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Old Willie’s tone grew sharp ‘s a knife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘<i>In primis</i>, I indite ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For makin’ strife wi’ the water o’ life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And preferrin’ <i>aqua vitæ!</i>’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then roared a voice with lusty din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a skipper’s when ’tis blowy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘If <i>that’s</i> a sin, <i>I</i>’d ne’er got in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As sure as my name’s Noah!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Baulked, Willie turned another leaf⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘There’s many here have heard ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the pain and grief o’ true belief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say hard things o’ the clergy!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rang a clear tone over all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘One plea for him allow me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I once heard call from o’er me, “Saul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why persecutest thou me?” ’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To the next charge vexed Willie turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sighing, wiped his glasses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘I’m much concerned to find ye yearned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er-warmly tow’rd the lasses!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here David sighed; poor Willie’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost all its self-possession:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘I leave this case to God’s own grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It baffles <i>my</i> discretion!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then sudden glory round me broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low melodious surges</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wings whose stroke to splendor woke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creation’s farthest verges;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cross stretched, ladder-like, secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From earth to heaven’s own portal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereby God’s poor, with footing sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Climbed up to peace immortal.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I heard a voice serene and low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(With my heart I seemed to hear it,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall soft and slow as snow on snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like grace of the heavenly spirit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sweet as over new-born son</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The croon of new-made mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice begun, ‘Sore tempted one!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, pausing, sighed, ‘Our brother!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘If not a sparrow fall, unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Father sees and knows it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think! recks He less his form express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soul his own deposit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If only dear to Him the strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never trip nor wander,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where were the throng whose morning song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrills his blue arches yonder?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Do souls alone clear-eyed, strong-kneed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Him true service render,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who need his hand to lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Find they his heart untender?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all your various ranks and fates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He opens doors to duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that waits there at your gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was servant of his Beauty.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘The Earth must richer sap secrete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Could ye in time but know it!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must juice concrete with fiercer heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere she can make her poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long generations go and come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she bears a singer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ages dumb of senses numb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The compensation-bringer!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Her cheaper broods in palaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She raises under glasses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But souls like these, heav’n’s hostages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spring shelterless as grasses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They share Earth’s blessing and her bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The common sun and shower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What makes your pain to them is gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your weakness is their power.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘These larger hearts must feel the rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stormier-waved temptation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These star-wide souls between their poles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bear zones of tropic passion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loved much!⁠—that is gospel good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Howe’er the text you handle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From common wood the cross was hewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By love turned priceless sandal.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘If scant his service at the kirk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He <i>paters</i> heard and <i>aves</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From choirs that lurk in hedge and birk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From blackbird and from mavis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cowering mouse, poor unroofed thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In him found Mercy’s angel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daisy’s ring brought every spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him love’s fresh evangel!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Not he the threatening texts who deals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is highest ‘mong the preachers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he who feels the woes and weals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all God’s wandering creatures.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He doth good work whose heart can find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spirit ’neath the letter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who makes his kind of happier mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaves wiser men and better.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘They make Religion be abhorred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who round with darkness gulf her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think no word can please the Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless it smell of sulphur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Poet-heart, that childlike guessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Father’s loving kindness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come now to rest! Thou didst his hest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If haply ’twas in blindness!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then leapt heaven’s portals wide apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at their golden thunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sudden start I woke, my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still throbbing-full of wonder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Father,’ I said, ‘ ’tis known to Thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How Thou thy Saints preparest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this I see⁠—Saint Charity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is still the first and fairest!’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dear Bard and Brother! let who may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against thy faults be railing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though far, I pray, from us be they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never had a failing!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One toast I’ll give, and that not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou wouldst pledge if present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him whose song, in nature strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes man of prince and peasant!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="in-an-album" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In an Album</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The misspelt scrawl, upon the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By some Pompeian idler traced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ashes packed (ironic fact!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies eighteen centuries uneffaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While many a page of bard and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deemed once mankind’s immortal gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost from Time’s ark, leaves no more mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than a keel’s furrow through the main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Chance and Change! our buzz’s range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is scarcely wider than a fly’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let us play at fame to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow be unknown and wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the fair beg locks of hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And autographs, and Lord knows what,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick! let us scratch our moment’s match,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make our brief blaze, and be forgot!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too pressed to wait, upon her slate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fame writes a name or two in doubt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce written, these no longer please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her own finger rubs them out:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may ensue, fair girl, that you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years hence this yellowing leaf may see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put to task, your memory ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain, ‘This Lowell, who was he?’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="at-the-commencement-dinner-1866" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">At the Commencement Dinner, 1866</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">In Acknowledging a Toast to the Smith Professor</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I rise, Mr. Chairman, as both of us know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the impromptu I promised you three weeks ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged up to my doom by your might and my mane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do what I vowed I’d do never again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I feel like your good honest dough when possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a stirring, impertinent devil of yeast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘You must rise,’ says the leaven. ‘I can’t,’ says the dough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Just examine my bumps, and you’ll see it’s no go.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘But you must,’ the tormentor insists, ‘ ’tis all right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must rise when I bid you, and, what’s more, be light.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis a dreadful oppression, this making men speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they’re sure to be sorry for all the next week;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some poor stick requesting, like Aaron’s, to bud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into eloquence, pathos, or wit in cold blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the dull brain that you vented your spite on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could be got, like an ox, by mere poking, to Brighton.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They say it is wholesome to rise with the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I dare say it may be if not overdone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I think it was Thomson who made the remark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas an excellent thing in its way⁠—for a lark;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to rise after dinner and look down the meeting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a distant (as Gray calls it) prospect of Eating,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a stomach half full and a cerebrum hollow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the tortoise-shell ere it was strung for Apollo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undercontract to raise anerithmon gelasma</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rhymes so hard hunted they gasp with the asthma,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And jokes not much younger than Jethro’s phylacteries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is something I leave you yourselves to characterize.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’ve a notion, I think, of a good dinner speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tripping light as a sandpiper over the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swerving this way and that as the wave of the moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washes out its slight trace with a dash of whim’s foam on ‘t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaving on memory’s rim just a sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something graceful had gone by, a live present tense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not poetry⁠—no, not quite that, but as good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kind of winged prose that could fly if it would.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a time for gay fancies as fleeting and vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the whisper of foam-beads on fresh-poured champagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since dinners were not perhaps strictly designed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For manoeuvring the heavy dragoons of the mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I hear your set speeches that start with a pop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wander and maunder, too feeble to stop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a vague apprehension from popular rumor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There used to be something by mortals called humor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beginning again when you thought they were done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Respectable, sensible, weighing a ton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as near to the present occasions of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a Fast Day discourse of the year eighteen ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I⁠—well, I sit still, and my sentiments smother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For am I not also a bore and a brother?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And a toast⁠—what should that, be? Light, airy, and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foam-Aphrodite of Bacchus’s sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fancy-tinged bubble, an orbed rainbow-stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That floats for an instant ’twixt goblet and brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A breath-born perfection, half something, half naught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breaks if it strike the hard edge of a thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do you ask me to make such? Ah no, not so simple;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask Apelles to paint you the ravishing dimple</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose shifting enchantment lights Venus’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the artist will tell you his skill is to seek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once fix it, ’tis naught, for the charm of it rises</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sudden bopeeps of its smiling surprises.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’ve tried to define it, but what mother’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could ever yet do what he knows should be done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My rocket has burst, and I watch in the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its fast-fading heart’s-blood drop back in despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one chance is left me, and, if I am quick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can palm off, before you suspect me, the stick.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now since I’ve succeeded⁠—I pray do not frown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ticknor’s and Longfellow’s classical gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And profess four strange languages, which, luckless elf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I speak like a native (of Cambridge) myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me beg, Mr. President, leave to propose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sentiment treading on nobody’s toes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give, in such ale as with pump-handles <i>we</i> brew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their memory who saved us from all talking Hebrew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A toast that to deluge with water is good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in Scripture they come in just after the flood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I give you the men but for whom, as I guess, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Modern languages ne’er could have had a professor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The builders of Babel, to whose zeal the lungs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the children of men owe confusion of tongues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a name all-embracing I couple therewith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is that of my founder⁠—the late Mr. Smith.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-parable-an-ass-munched-thistles-while-a-nightingale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Parable</h2>
			<p>
				<span>An ass munched thistles, while a nightingale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From passion’s fountain flooded all the vale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hee-haw!’ cried he, ‘I hearken,’ as who knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For such ear-largess humble thanks were due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Friend,’ said the wingèd pain, ‘in vain you bray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tunnels bring, not cisterns, for my lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None but his peers the poet rightly hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor mete we listeners by their length of ear.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sayings" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sayings</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>1.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In life’s small things be resolute and great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep thy muscle trained: know’st thou when Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy measure takes, or when she’ll say to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘I find thee worthy; do this deed for me’?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>2.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A camel-driver, angry with his drudge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beating him, called him hunchback; to the hind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus spake a dervish: ‘Friend, the Eternal Judge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dooms not his work, but ours, the crooked mind.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>3.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Swiftly the politic goes: is it dark?⁠—he borrows a lantern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly the statesman and sure, guiding his steps by the stars.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>4.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘Where lies the capital, pilgrim, seat of who governs the Faithful?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Thither my footsteps are bent: it is where Saadi is lodged.’</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="for-a-bell-at-cornell-university" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">For a Bell at Cornell University</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I call as fly the irrevocable hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Futile as air or strong as fate to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your lives of sand or granite; awful powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even as men choose, they either give or take.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-a-memorial-window-to-sir-walter-raleigh-set-up-in-st-margarets-westminster-by-american-contributors" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">For a Memorial Window to Sir Walter Raleigh, Set Up in St. Margaret’s, Westminster, by American Contributors</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The New World’s sons, from England’s breasts we drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such milk as bids remember whence we came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of her Past, wherefrom our Present grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This window we inscribe with Raleigh’s name.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="proposed-for-a-soldiers-and-sailors-monument-in-boston" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Proposed for a Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument in Boston</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To those who died for her on land and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she might have a country great and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boston builds this: build ye her monument</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lives like theirs, at duty’s summons spent.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-misconception" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Misconception</h2>
			<p>
				<span>B, taught by Pope to do his good by stealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt participle and noun no difference feeling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In office placed to serve the Commonwealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does himself all the good he can by stealing.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-boss" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Boss</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Skilled to pull wires, he baffles Nature’s hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sure intended him to stretch a rope.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sun-worship" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sun-Worship</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If I were the rose at your window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happiest rose of its crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every blossom I bore would bend inward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>They’d</i> know where the sunshine grew.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="changed-perspective" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Changed Perspective</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Full oft the pathway to her door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve measured by the selfsame track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet doubt the distance more and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis so much longer coming back!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="with-a-pair-of-gloves-lost-in-a-wager" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">With a Pair of Gloves Lost in a Wager</h2>
			<p>
				<span>We wagered, she for sunshine, I for rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I should hint sharp practice if I dared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For was not she beforehand sure to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who made the sunshine we together shared?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sixty-eighth-birthday" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sixty-Eighth Birthday</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As life runs on, the road grows strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With faces new, and near the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The milestones into headstones change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath every one a friend.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-if-some-small-savor-creep-into-my-rhyme" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h2>
				<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">If Some Small Savor Creep Into My Rhyme</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>If some small savor creep into my rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the old poets, if some words I use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neglected long, which have the lusty thews</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that gold-haired and earnest-hearted time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose loving joy and sorrow all sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have given our tongue its starry eminence⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not pride, God knows, but reverence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hath grown in me since my childhood’s prime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein I feel that my poor lyre is strung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With soul-strings like to theirs, and that I have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No right to muse their holy graves among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I can be a custom-fettered slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in mine own true spirit, am not brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak what rusheth upward to my tongue.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hakons-lay" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hakon’s Lay</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Then Thorstein looked at Hakon, where he sate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute as a cloud amid the stormy hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said: “O, Skald, sing now an olden song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as our fathers heard who led great lives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as the bravest on a shield is borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the waving host that shouts him king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So rode their thrones upon the thronging seas!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the old man arose: white-haired he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-bearded, and with eyes that looked afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their still region of perpetual snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the little smokes and stirs of men:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head was bowed with gathered flakes of years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As winter bends the sea-foreboding pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But something triumphed in his brow and eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which whoso saw it, could not see and crouch:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud rang the emptied beakers as he mused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brooding his eyried thoughts; then, as an eagle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circles smooth-winged above the wind-vexed woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wheeled his soul into the air of song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High o’er the stormy hall; and thus he sang:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The fletcher for his arrow-shaft picks out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wood closest-grained, long-seasoned, straight as light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, from a quiver full of such as these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wary bow-man, matched against his peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long doubting, singles yet once more the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is it that can make such shafts as Fate?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What archer of his arrows is so choice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hits the white so surely? They are men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chosen of her quiver; nor for her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will every reed suffice, or cross-grained stick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At random from life’s vulgar fagot plucked:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such answer household ends; but she will have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls straight and clear, of toughest fibre, sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the heart of heart; from these she strips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All needless stuff, all sapwood, hardens them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From circumstance untoward feathers plucks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crumpled and cheap, and barbs with iron will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour that passes is her quiver-boy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she draws bow, ’tis not across the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ’gainst the sun, her haste-snatched arrow sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sun and wind have plighted faith to her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere men have heard the sinew twang, behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the butt’s heart her trembling messenger!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The song is old and simple that I sing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good were the days of yore, when men were tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ring of shields, as now by ring of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, while the gods are left, and hearts of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the free ocean, still the days are good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the broad Earth roams Opportunity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knocks at every door of hut or hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until she finds the brave soul that she wants.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ceased, and instantly the frothy tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of interrupted wassail roared along;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Leif, the son of Eric, sate apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Musing, and, with his eyes upon the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw shapes of arrows, lost as soon as seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then with that resolve his heart was bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, like a humming shaft, through many a strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day and night across the unventured seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot the brave prow to cut on Vinland sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first rune in the Saga of the West.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="out-of-doors" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Out of Doors</h2>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis good to be abroad in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gifts abide when day is done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each thing in nature from his cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers a several virtue up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grace within its being’s reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Becomes the nutriment of each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the same life imbibed by all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes each most individual:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the twig-bending peaches seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glow that mantles in their cheek⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence comes the Indian-summer bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hazes round the basking plum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, from the same impartial light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass sucks green, the lily white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like these the soul, for sunshine made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows wan and gracile in the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her faculties, which God decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Various as Summer’s dædal breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one sad color are imbued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut from the sun that tints their blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of the poet’s roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deadens the dyes of warp and woof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whate’er of ancient song remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has fresh air flowing in its veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Greece and eldest Ind knew well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That out of doors, with world-wide swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arches the student’s lawful cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, unfruitful lore of books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whose vain idiom we reject</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit’s mother-dialect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aliens among the birds and brooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull to interpret or believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What gospels lost the woods retrieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what the eaves-dropping violet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reports from God, who walketh yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His garden in the hush of eve!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, ye pedants city-bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwise of heart, too wise of head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who handcuff Art with <i>thus and so</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in each other’s footprints tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those who walk through drifted snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, from deep study of brick walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjecture of the water-falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By six square feet of smoke-stained sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compute those deeps that overlie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The still tarn’s heaven-anointed eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in your earthen crucible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With chemic tests essay to spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How nature works in field and dell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek we where Shakspeare buried gold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such hands no charmed witch-hazel hold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beach and rock repeats the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystic <i>Open Sesame</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Greylock’s voices not in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comment on Milton’s mountain strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cunningly the various wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spenser’s locked music can unbind.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="farewell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Farewell</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Farewell! as the bee round the blossom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth murmur drowsily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So murmureth round my bosom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The memory of thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingering, it seems to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the wind more full doth flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waving the flower to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still returneth, Marian!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hope no longer burneth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which did so fiercely burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My joy to sorrow turneth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although loath, loath to turn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would forget⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet⁠—and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart to thee still yearneth, Marian!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair as a single star thou shinest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And white as lilies are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slender hands wherewith thou twinest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heavy auburn hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that is divinest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art so fair and tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy looks so queenly are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy very shadow on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy step upon the stair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought that thou art nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chance look of thine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are more to me than all, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will be till I die!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the last quiver of a bell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth fade into the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a subsiding swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dies we know not where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So my hope melted and was gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I raised mine eyes to bless the star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shared its light with me so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below its silver throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloom and chilling vacancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were all was left to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark, bleak night I was alone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone in the blessed Earth, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what were all to me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its love, and light, and mirth, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I were not with thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart will not forget thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than the moaning brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgets the moon when she is set;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gush when first I met thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thrilled my brain like wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth thrill as madly yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart cannot forget thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though it may droop and pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too deeply it had set thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every love of mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No new moon ever cometh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No flower ever bloometh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No twilight ever gloometh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’m more only thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh look not on me, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine eyes are wild and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they have won me, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From peacefulness and sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunlight doth not sun me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meek moonshine doth shun me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sweetest voices stun me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I can only weep, Marian!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a landbird far at sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth wander through the sleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drooping downward wearily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds no rest for her feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wandereth my memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the years when we did meet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I used to say that everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Partook a share of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That not a little bird could sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or green leaf flutter on a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nothing could be beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save part of thee were there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from thy soul so clear and full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All bright and blessèd things did cull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charm to make them fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spirit through the earth doth flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And face me wheresoe’er I go⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What right hath perfectness to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such weary weight of woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the soul which cannot live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On anything more low?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh leave me, leave me, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s no fair thing I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But doth deceive me, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into sad dreams of thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cold snake gnaws my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crushes round my brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I should glory but to part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So bitterly again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling the slow tears start</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fall in fiery rain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s a wide ring round the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ghost-like clouds glide by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I hear the sad winds croon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dirge to the lowering sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s nothing soft or mild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pale moon’s sickly light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all looks strange and wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dim, foreboding night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think thou must be dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some dark and lonely place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With candles at thy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a pall above thee spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hide thy dead, cold face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I can see thee underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pale, and still, and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine eyes closed smoothly and a wreath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flowers in thy hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw thy face so clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou wast with the living,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now beneath the pall, so drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stiff, and unforgiving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot flee thee, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot turn away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine eyes must see thee, Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through salt tears night and day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fancies-about-a-rosebud" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Fancies About a Rosebud,</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Pressed in an Old Copy of Spenser.</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Who prest you here? The Past can tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When summer skies were bright above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some full heart did leap and swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the white new moon of love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some Poet, haply, when the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showed like a calm sea, grand and blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere its cold, inky waves had curled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er the numb heart once warm and true;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When, with his soul brimful of morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He looked beyond the vale of Time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor saw therein the dullard scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That made his heavenliness a crime;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When, musing o’er the Poets olden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His soul did like a sun upstart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shoot its arrows, clear and golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through slavery’s cold and darksome heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! too soon the veil is lifted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hangs between the soul and pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too soon the morning-red hath drifted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into dull cloud, or fallen in rain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or were you prest by one who nurst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bleak memories of love gone by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose heart, like a star fallen, burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In dark and erring vacancy?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him you still were fresh and green</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As when you grew upon the stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a breezy summer scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came back⁠—and many a moonlit walk;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there would be a hum of bees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A smell of childhood in the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old, fresh feelings cooled the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, like loved fingers, stirred his hair!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then would you suddenly be blasted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the keen wind of one dark thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One nameless woe, that had outlasted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sudden blow whereby ’twas brought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or were you prest here by two lovers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seemed to read these verses rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But found between the antique covers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What Spenser could not prison there:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Songs which his glorious soul had heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his dull pen could never write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which flew, like some gold-wingèd bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the blue heaven out of sight?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My heart is with them as they sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see the rosebud in her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see her small hand taking it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From out its odorous, snowy nest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I hear him swear that he will keep it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In memory of that blessed day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smile on it or over-weep it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she and spring are far away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah me! I needs must droop my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brush away a happy tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they are gone, and, dry and dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rosebud lies before me here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet is it in no stranger’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I will guard it tenderly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it shall be a magic wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring mine own true love to me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My heart runs o’er with sweet surmises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The while my fancy weaves her rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind hopes and musical surprises</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throng round me from the olden time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I do not care to know who prest you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough for me to feel and know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That some heart’s love and longing blest you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knitting to-day with long-ago.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="new-years-eve-1844" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">New Year’s Eve, 1844</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The night is calm and beautiful; the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkles beneath the clear and frosty moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cold stars, as if it took delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its own silent whiteness; the hushed earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeps in the soft arms of the embracing blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secure as if angelic squadrons yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encamped about her, and each watching star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gained double brightness from the flashing arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wingèd and unsleeping sentinels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upward the calm of infinite silence deepens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea that flows between high heaven and earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Musing by whose smooth brink we sometimes find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stray leaf floated from those happier shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hope, perchance not vainly, that some flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which we had watered with our holiest tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale blooms, and yet our scanty garden’s best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the same ocean piloted by love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May find a haven at the feet of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be not wholly worthless in his sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, high dependence on a higher Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole stay for all these restless faculties</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wander, Ishmael-like, the desert bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein our human knowledge hath its home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shifting their light-framed tents from day to day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With each new-found oasis, wearied soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only certain of uncertainty!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, mighty humbleness that feels with awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet with a vast exulting feels, no less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this huge Minster of the Universe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose smallest oratories are glorious worlds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With painted oriels of dawn and sunset;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose carvèd ornaments are systems grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orion kneeling in his starry niche,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lyre whose strings give music audible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To holy ears, and countless splendors more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowned by the blazing Cross high-hung o’er all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose organ music is the solemn stops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of endless Change breathed through by endless Good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose choristers are all the morning stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose altar is the sacred human heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon Love’s candles burn unquenchably,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trimmed day and night by gentle-handed Peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its arches and its pinnacles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stretch forever and forever up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is founded on the silent heart of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent, yet pulsing forth exhaustless life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the least veins of all created things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit musings these for the departing year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God be thanked for such a crystal night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fills the spirit with good store of thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, like a cheering fire of walnut, crackle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hearthstone of the heart, and cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mild home-glow o’er all Humanity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, though the poisoned shafts of evil doubts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assail the skyey panoply of Faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the great hopes which we have had for man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foes in disguise, because they based belief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On man’s endeavor, not on God’s decree⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though these proud-visaged hopes, once turned to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurl backward many a deadly Parthian dart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rankles in the soul and makes it sick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With vain regret, nigh verging on despair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, in such calm and earnest hours as this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We well can feel how every living heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sleeps to-night in palace or in cot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or unroofed hovel, or which need hath known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of other homestead than the arching sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is circled watchfully with seraph fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How our own erring will it is that hangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flaming sword o’er Eden’s unclosed gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which gives free entrance to the pure in heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with its guarding walls doth fence the meek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep then, O Earth, in thy blue-vaulted cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent over always by thy mother Heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We all are tall enough to reach God’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And angels are no taller: looking back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the smooth wake of a year o’erpast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We see the black clouds furling, one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the advancing majesty of Truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something won for Freedom, whose least gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is as a firm and rock-built citadel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefrom to launch fresh battle on her foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, leaning from the time’s extremest prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we gaze forward through the blinding spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dimly see how much of ill remains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many fetters to be sawn asunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the slow toil of individual zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or haply rusted by salt tears in twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We feel, with something of a sadder heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet bracing up our bruisèd mail the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fronting the old foe with fresher spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How great it is to breathe with human breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be but poor foot-soldiers in the ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our old exiled king, Humanity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encamping after every hard-won field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer and nearer Heaven’s happy plains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many great souls have gone to rest, and sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under this armor, free and full of peace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If these have left the earth, yet Truth remains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endurance, too, the crowning faculty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble minds, and Love, invincible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By any weapons; and these hem us round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silence such that all the groaning clank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this mad engine men have made of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dulls not some ears for catching purer tones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wander from the dim surrounding vast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or far more clear melodious prophecies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The natural music of the heart of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which by kind Sorrow’s ministry hath learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the true sceptre of all power is love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And humbleness the palace-gate of truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What man with soul so blind as sees not here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first faint tremble of Hope’s morning-star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foretelling how the God-forged shafts of dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitted already on their golden string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall soon leap earthward with exulting flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thrid the dark heart of that evil faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose trust is in the clumsy arms of Force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ozier hauberk of a ruder age?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom! thou other name for happy Truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou warrior-maid, whose steel-clad feet were never</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the stirrup, nor thy lance uncouched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thy fierce eye enticèd from its watch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast learned now, by hero-blood in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured to enrich the soil which tyrants reap;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By wasted lives of prophets, and of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, by the promise in their souls upheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the red arms of a fiery death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went blithely as the golden-girdled bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinks in the sleepy poppy’s cup of flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the long woes of nations set at war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so the swollen torrent of their wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May find a vent, else sweeping off like straws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thousand cobweb threads, grown cable-huge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By time’s long gathered dust, but cobwebs still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bind the Many that the Few may gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leisure to wither by the drought of ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What heavenly germs in their own souls were sown;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By all these searching lessons thou hast learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To throw aside thy blood-stained helm and spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with thy bare brow daunt the enemy’s front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing that God will make the lily stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the soft grasp of naked Gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stronger than iron spear to shatter through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sevenfold toughness of Wrong’s idle shield.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-mystical-ballad" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Mystical Ballad</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sunset scarce had dimmed away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the twilight’s doubtful gray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One long cloud o’er the horizon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath which, a streak of bluish white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wavered between the day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the pine trees on the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembly evening-star did thrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the new moon, with slender rim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the elm arches gleaming dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filled memory’s chalice to the brim.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On such an eve the heart doth grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of surmise, and scarce can know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it be now or long ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if indeed it doth exist;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wonderful enchanted mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the new moon doth wander out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapping all things in mystic doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that this world doth seem untrue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all our fancies to take hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some life ages since gone through.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The maiden sat and heard the flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the west wind so soft and low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leaves scarce quivered to and fro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unbound, her heavy golden hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rippled across her bosom bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gleamed with thrilling snowy white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far through the magical moonlight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breeze rose with a rustling swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from afar there came the smell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a long-forgotten lily-bell.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The dim moon rested on the hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But silent, without thought or will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sat the dreamy maiden still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the moon’s tip, like a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew down below the horizon’s bar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her black noon the night hath grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still the maiden sits alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale as a corpse beneath a stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her white bosom still doth gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the deep midnight like a dream.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Cloudless the morning came and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lavishly the sun doth share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gold among her golden hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindling it all, till slowly so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glory round her head doth glow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A withered flower is in her hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That grew in some far distant land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, silently transfigurèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wide calm eyes, and undrooped head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They found the stranger-maiden dead.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A youth, that morn, ’neath other skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt sudden tears burn in his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his heart throng with memories;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things without him seemed to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange brotherhood with things within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he forever felt that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walked in the midst of mystery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thenceforth, why, he could not tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart would curdle at the smell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his once-cherished lily-bell.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Something from him had passed away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some shifting trembles of clear day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through starry crannies in his clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew bright and steadfast, more and more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all had been dull earth before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, through these chinks, like him of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit converse high did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clearer loves and wider powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That brought him dewy fruits and flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far Elysian groves and bowers.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Just on the farther bound of sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unproved by outward evidence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But known by a deep influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which through our grosser clay doth shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With light unwaning and divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond where highest thought can fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretcheth the world of Mystery⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they not greatly overween</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who deem that nothing true hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save the unspeakable Unseen.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One step beyond life’s work-day things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One more beat of the soul’s broad wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One deeper sorrow sometimes brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit into that great Vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where neither future is nor past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None knoweth how he entered there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, waking, finds his spirit where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought an angel could not soar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, what he called false dreams before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very air about his door.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These outward seemings are but shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereby the body sees and knows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far down beneath, forever flows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream of subtlest sympathies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That make our spirits strangely wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In awe, and fearful bodings dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, from the sense’s outer rim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch forth beyond our thought and sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fine arteries of circling light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pulsed outward from the Infinite.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="anti-apis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Anti-Apis</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Praisest Law, friend? We, too, love it much as they that love it best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the deep, august foundation, whereon Peace and Justice rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rock primeval, hidden in the Past its bases be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Block by block the endeavoring Ages built it up to what we see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But dig down: the Old unbury; thou shalt find on every stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That each Age hath carved the symbol of what god to them was known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ugly shapes and brutish sometimes, but the fairest that they knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If their sight were dim and earthward, yet their hope and aim were true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Surely as the unconscious needle feels the far-off loadstar draw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strives every gracious nature to at-one itself with law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the elder Saints and Sages laid their pious framework right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a theocratic instinct covered from the people’s sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As their gods were, so their laws were; Thor the strong could reave and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>steal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So through many a peaceful inlet tore the Norseman’s eager keel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a new law came when Christ came, and not blameless, as before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can we, paying him our lip-tithes, give our lives and faiths to Thor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Law is holy: ay, but what law? Is there nothing more divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the patched-up broils of Congress, venal, full of meat and wine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there, say you, nothing higher? Naught, God save us! that transcends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laws of cotton texture, wove by vulgar men for vulgar ends?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Did Jehovah ask their counsel, or submit to them a plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere He filled with loves, hopes, longings, this aspiring heart of man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their edict does the soul wait, ere it swing round to the pole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the true, the free, the God-willed, all that makes it be a soul?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Law is holy; but not your law, ye who keep the tablets whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While ye dash the Law to pieces, shatter it in life and soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing up the Ark is lightsome, golden Apis hid within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we Levites share the offerings, richer by the people’s sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Give to Cæsar what is Cæsar’s? yes, but tell me, if you can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this superscription Cæsar’s here upon our brother man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not here some other’s image, dark and sullied though it be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this fellow-soul that worships, struggles Godward even as we?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was not to such a future that the Mayflower’s prow was turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to such a faith the martyrs clung, exulting as they burned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by such laws are men fashioned, earnest, simple, valiant, great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the household virtues whereon rests the unconquerable state.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! there is a higher gospel, overhead the God-roof springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each glad, obedient planet like a golden shuttle sings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the web which Time is weaving in his never-resting loom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaving seasons many-colored, bringing prophecy to doom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Think you Truth a farthing rushlight, to be pinched out when you will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your deft official fingers, and your politicians’ skill?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is your God a wooden fetish, to be hidden out of sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his block eyes may not see you do the thing that is not right?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the Destinies think not so; to their judgment-chamber lone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes no noise of popular clamor, there Fame’s trumpet is not blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your majorities they reck not; that you grant, but then you say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you differ with them somewhat⁠—which is stronger, you or they?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Patient are they as the insects that build islands in the deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hurl not the bolted thunder, but their silent way they keep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they have been that we know; where empires towered that were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>not just;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! the skulking wild fox scratches in a little heap of dust.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="letter-from-boston" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Letter from Boston</h2>
			<p>
				<i>December, 1846.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Dear M⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">By way of saving time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll do this letter up in rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose slim stream through four pages flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere one is packed with tight-screwed prose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threading the tube of an epistle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth as a child’s breath through a whistle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The great attraction now of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the ‘Bazaar’ at Faneuil Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where swarm the anti-slavery folks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thick, dear Miller, as your jokes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s <b>Garrison</b>, his features very</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benign for an incendiary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaming forth sunshine through his glasses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the surrounding lads and lasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(No bee could blither be, or brisker,)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Pickwick somehow turned John Ziska,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bump of firmness swelling up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a rye cupcake from its cup.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, too, was his English tea-set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in his ear a kind of flea set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Uncle Samuel for its beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demanding sixty dollars duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(’Twas natural Sam should serve his trunk ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For G., you know, has cut his uncle,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereas, had he but once made tea in’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His uncle’s ear had had the flea in’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There being not a cent of duty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On any pot that ever drew tea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was <b>Maria Chapman</b>, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her swift eyes of clear steel-blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coiled-up mainspring of the Fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Originating everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The expansive force without a sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whirls a hundred wheels around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself meanwhile as calm and still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the bare crown of Prospect Hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble woman, brave and apt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cumæan sibyl not more rapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who might, with those fair tresses shorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Maid of Orleans’ casque have worn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself the Joan of our Ark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every shaft a shining mark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there, too, was <b>Eliza Follen</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who scatters fruit-creating pollen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er a blossom she can find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardy enough for Truth’s north wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each several point of all her face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tremblingly bright with the inward grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if all motion gave it light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like phosphorescent seas at night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There jokes our <b>Edmund</b>, plainly son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him who bearded Jefferson,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A non-resistant by conviction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with a bump in contradiction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that whene’er it gets a chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pen delights to play the lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And⁠—you may doubt it, or believe it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full at the head of Joshua Leavitt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very calumet he’d launch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scourge him with the olive branch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A master with the foils of wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis natural he should love a hit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gentleman, withal, and scholar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only base things excite his choler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then his satire’s keen and thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the lithe blade of Saladin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good letters are a gift apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his are gems of Flemish art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True offspring of the fireside Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a rag-gathering of news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a new hopfield which is all poles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of one blood with Horace Walpole’s.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There, with cue hand behind his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands <b>Phillips</b> buttoned in a sack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Attic orator, our Chatham;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old fogies, when he lightens at ’em,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrivel like leaves; to him ’tis granted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always to say the word that’s wanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that he seems but speaking clearer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tiptop thought of every hearer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each flash his brooding heart lets fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fires what’s combustible in all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sends the applauses bursting in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an exploded magazine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eloquence no frothy show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gutter’s street-polluted flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Mississippi’s yellow flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose shoalness can’t be seen for mud;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So simply clear, serenely deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So silent-strong its graceful sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None measures its unrippling force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has not striven to stem its course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How fare their barques who think to play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With smooth Niagara’s mane of spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Austin’s total shipwreck say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never spoke a word too much⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except of Story, or some such,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom, though condemned by ethics strict,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart refuses to convict.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beyond; a crater in each eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sways brown, broad-shouldered <b>Pillsbury</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tears up words like trees by the roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Theseus in stout cow-hide boots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wager of eternal war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against that loathsome Minotaur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom we sacrifice each year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best blood of our Athens here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Dear M., pray brush up your Lempriere.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terrible denouncer he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Sinai burns unquenchably</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his lips; he well might be a</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot-blazing soul from fierce Judea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Habakkuk, Ezra, or Hosea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His words are red hot iron searers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nightmare-like he mounts his hearers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spurring them like avenging Fate, or</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Waterton his alligator.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hard by, as calm as summer even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiles the reviled and pelted <b>Stephen</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unappeasable Boanerges</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Churches and the Clergies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grim <i>savant</i> who, to complete</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own peculiar cabinet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contrived to label ‘mong his kicks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One from the followers of Hicks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who studied mineralogy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with soft book upon the knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But learned the properties of stones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By contact sharp of flesh and bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made the <i>experimentum crucis</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his own body’s vital juices;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man with caoutchouc endurance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A perfect gem for life insurance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kind of maddened John the Baptist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom the harshest word comes aptest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, struck by stone or brick ill-starred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurls back an epithet as hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, deadlier than stone or brick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has a propensity to stick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His oratory is like the scream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the iron-horse’s frenzied steam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which warns the world to leave wide space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the black engine’s swerveless race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye men with neckcloths white, I warn you⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Habet</i> a whole haymow <i>in cornu</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A Judith, there, turned Quakeress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits <b>Abby</b> in her modest dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serving a table quietly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if that mild and downcast eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed never, with its scorn intense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than Medea’s eloquence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the same force which shakes its dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far-blazing blocks o’er Ætna’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the wires in silence fares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And messages of commerce bears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No nobler gift of heart and brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No life more white from spot or stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was e’er on Freedom’s altar laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than hers, the simple Quaker maid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These last three (leaving in the lurch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other themes) assault the Church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who therefore writes them in her lists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Satan’s limbs and atheists;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each sect has one argument</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby the rest to hell are sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which serve them like the Graiæ’s tooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed round in turn from mouth to mouth;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any <i>ism</i> should arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then look on it with constable’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tie round its neck a heavy <i>athe-</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give it kittens’ hydropathy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This trick with other (useful very) tricks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is laid to the Babylonian <i>meretrix</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’twas in vogue before her day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever priesthoods had their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Buddha’s Popes with this struck dumb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The followers of Fi and Fum.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well, if the world, with prudent fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pay God a seventh of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as a Farmer, who would pack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All his religion in one stack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this world works six days in seven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And idles on the seventh for Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expecting, for his Sunday’s sowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the next world to go a-mowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crop of all his meeting-going;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the poor Church, by power enticed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds none so infidel as Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite backward reads his Gospel meek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As ’twere in Hebrew writ, not Greek,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fencing the gallows and the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With conscripts drafted from his word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes one gate of Heaven so wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the rich orthodox might ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through on their camels, while the poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Squirm through the scant, unyielding door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, of the Gospel’s straitest size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is narrower than bead-needles’ eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wonder World and Church should call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The true faith atheistical?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, after all, ’twixt you and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear Miller, I could never see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Sin’s and Error’s ugly smirch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stained the walls only of the Church;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are good priests, and men who take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom’s torn cloak for lucre’s sake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t believe the Church so strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some men do, for Right or Wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, for this subject (long and vext)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must refer you to my next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As also for a list exact</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of goods with which the Hall was packed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>READER! <i>walk up at once (it will soon be too late), and buy at a perfectly ruinous rate.</i></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fragments-of-an-unfinished-poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fragments of an Unfinished Poem</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I am a man of forty, sirs, a native of East Haddam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have some reason to surmise that I descend from Adam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what’s my pedigree to you? That I will soon unravel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve sucked my Haddam-Eden dry, therefore desire to travel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as a natural consequence, presume I needn’t say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish to write some letters home and have those letters p⁠⸺⁠</span>
				<br/>
				<span>[I spare the word suggestive of those grim Next Morns that mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Clump, Clump</i>, the stairways of the brain with⁠—’<i>Sir, my small account</i>,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after every good we gain⁠—Love, Fame, Wealth, Wisdom⁠—still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As punctual as a cuckoo clock, hold up their little bill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i>garçons</i> in our Café of Life, by dreaming us forgot⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting, like Homer’s heroes, full and musing God knows what⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they say, bowing, <i>S’il vous plait, voila, Messieurs, la note!</i>]</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not hint at this so soon, but in our callous day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tollman Debt, who drops his bar across the world’s highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Cæsar in mid-march would stop, if Cæsar could not pay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pilgriming’s dearer than it was: men cannot travel now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scot-free from Dan to Beersheba upon a simple vow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, as long back as Bess’s time⁠—when Walsingham went over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambassador to Cousin France, at Canterbury and Dover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was so fleeced by innkeepers that, ere he quitted land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wrote to the Prime Minister to take the knaves in hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I with staff and scallop-shell should try my way to win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would Bonifaces quarrel as to who should take me in?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or would my pilgrim’s progress end where Bunyan started his on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my grand tour be round and round the backyard of a prison?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I give you here a saying deep and therefore, haply true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis out of Merlin’s prophecies, but quite as good as new:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The question boath for men and meates longe voyages yt beginne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lyes in a notshell, rather saye lyes in a case of tinne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, though men may not travel now, as in the Middle Ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With self-sustaining retinues of little gilt-edged pages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one may manage pleasantly, where’er he likes to roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sending his small pages (at so much per small page) home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if a staff and scallop-shell won’t serve so well as then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our outlay is about as small⁠—just paper, ink, and pen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be thankful! Humbugs never die, more than the wandering Jew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bankrupt, they publish their own deaths, slink for a while from view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then take an <i>alias</i>, change the sign, and the old trade renew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indeed, ’tis wondrous how each Age, though laughing at the Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insists on having its tight shoe made on the same old last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it is sure its system would break up at once without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bunion which it <i>will</i> believe hereditary gout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it takes all its swans for geese, nay, stranger yet and sadder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees in its treadmill’s fruitless jog a heavenward Jacob’s-ladder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouts, <i>Lo, the Shining Heights are reached! One moment, more aspire!</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trots into cramps its poor, dear legs, gets never an inch the higher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like the others, ends with pipe and mug beside the fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, ’tween each doze, it whiffs and sips and watches with a sneer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green recruits that trudge and sweat where it had swinked whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sighs to think this soon spent zeal should be in simple truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only interval between old Fogyhood and Youth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Well,’ thus it muses, ‘well, what odds? ’Tis not for us to warn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill be the same when we are dead, and was ere we were born;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the Treadmill, too, how grind our store of winter’s corn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had we no stock, nor twelve per cent received from Treadmill shares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We might⁠ ⁠… but these poor devils at last will get our easy chairs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High aims and hopes have great rewards, they, too, serene and snug,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall one day have their soothing pipe and their enlivening mug;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Adam, empty-handed Youth hath always heard the hum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Good Times Coming, and will hear until the last day come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young ears Hear forward, old ones back, and, while the earth rolls on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-handed Eld shall hear recede the steps of Good Times Gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah what a cackle we set up whene’er an egg was laid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Cack-cack-cack-cackle!</i> rang around, the scratch for worms was stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Cut-cut-ca-dah-cut!</i> from <i>this</i> egg the coming cock shall stalk!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great New Era dawns, the age of Deeds and not of Talk!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every stupid hen of us hugged close his egg of chalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought⁠—sure, I feel life stir within, each day with greater strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lo, the chick! from former chicks he differed not a jot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But grew and crew and scratched and went, like those before, to pot!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So muse the dim <i>Emeriti</i>, and, mournful though it be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must confess a kindred thought hath sometimes come to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, though but just of forty turned, have heard the rumorous fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nine and ninety Coming Men, all⁠—coming till they came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure Mephistopheles all this? the vulgar nature jeers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good friend, while I was writing it, my eyes were dim with tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice happy he who cannot see, or who his eyes can shut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life’s deepest sorrow is contained in that small word there⁠—But!</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>We’re pretty nearly crazy here with change and go ahead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flinging our caught bird away for two i’ th’ bush instead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With butting ’gainst the wall which we declare <i>shall</i> be a portal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And questioning Deeps that never yet have oped their lips to mortal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’re growing pale and hollow-eyed, and out of all condition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With <i>mediums</i> and prophetic chairs, and crickets with a mission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(The most astounding oracles since Balaam’s donkey spoke⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould seem our furniture was all of Dodonean oak.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make but the public laugh, be sure ’twill take you to be somebody;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill wrench its button from your clutch, my densely earnest glum body;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis good, this noble earnestness, good in its place, but why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make great Achilles’ shield the pan to bake a penny pie?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, when we have a kitchen-range, insist that we shall stop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore clear down to central fires to broil our daily chop?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excalibur and Durandart are swords of price, but then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why draw them sternly when you wish to trim your nails or pen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small gulf between the ape and man; you bridge it with your staff;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it will be impassable until the ape can laugh;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, no, be common now and then, be sensible, be funny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as Siberians bait their traps for bears with pots of honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which ere they’ll withdraw their snouts, they’ll suffer many a club-lick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So bait your moral figure-of-fours to catch the Orson public.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look how the dead leaves melt their way down through deep-drifted snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They take the sun-warmth down with them⁠—pearls could not conquer so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There <i>is</i> a moral here, you see: if you would preach, you must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steep all your truths in sunshine would you have them pierce the crust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Jeremiah, you are grand and terrible, a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonder, but were never quite a popular divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fancy the figure you would cut among the nuts and wine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, on occasion, too, could preach, but hold it wiser far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give the public sermons it will take with its cigar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And morals fugitive, and vague as are these smoke-wreaths light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which⁠ ⁠… I trace⁠ ⁠… a⁠ ⁠… let me see⁠—bless me! ’tis out of sight.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>There are some goodish things at sea; for instance, one can feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grandeur in the silent man forever at the wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bit of two-legged intellect, that particle of drill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who the huge floundering hulk inspires with reason, brain, and will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes the ship, though skies are black and headwinds whistle loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obey her conscience there which feels the loadstar through the cloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when by lusty western gales the full-sailed barque is hurled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the great moon which, setting on, the silent underworld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rounds luridly up to look on ours, and shoots a broadening line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of palpitant light from crest to crest across the ridgy brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the bows look back and feel a thrill that never stales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that full-bosomed, swan-white pomp of onward-yearning sails;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, when dear cousin Bull laments that you can’t make a poem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take him aboard a clipper-ship, young Jonathan, and show him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A work of art that in its grace and grandeur may compare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With any thing that any race has fashioned any where;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not a statue, grumbles John; nay, if you come to that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We think of Hyde Park Corner, and concede you beat us flat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your equestrian statue to a Nose and a Cocked hat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis not a cathedral; well, e’en that we will allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both statues and cathedrals are anachronistic now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your minsters, coz, the monuments of men who conquered you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’d sell a bargain, if we’d take the deans and chapters too;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No; mortal men build nowadays, as always heretofore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good temples to the gods which they in very truth adore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherds of this Broker Age, with all their willing flocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although they bow to stones no more, do bend the knee to stocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And churches can’t be beautiful though crowded, floor and gallery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If people worship preacher, and if preacher worship salary;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis well to look things in the face, the god o’ the modern universe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hermes, cares naught for halls of art and libraries of puny verse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they don’t sell, he notes them thus upon his ledger⁠—say, <i>per</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Contra</i> to a loss of so much stone, best Russia duck and paper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after all, about this Art men talk a deal of fudge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each nation has its path marked out, from which it must not budge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Romans had as little art as Noah in his ark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet somehow on this globe contrived to make an epic mark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Religion, painting, sculpture, song⁠—for these they ran up jolly ticks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Greece and Egypt, but they were great artists in their politics,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if we make no minsters, John, nor epics, yet the Fates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not entirely deaf to men who <i>can</i> build ships and states;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arts are never pioneers, but men have strength and health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, called on suddenly, can improvise a commonwealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, can more easily go on and frame them by the dozen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than you can make a dinner-speech, dear sympathizing cousin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though our restless Jonathan have not your graver bent, sure he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does represent this hand-to-mouth, pert, rapid nineteenth century;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the Age of Scramble; men move faster than they did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they pried up the imperial Past’s deep-dusted coffin-lid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching for scrolls of precedent; the wire-leashed lightning now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replaces Delphos⁠—men don’t leave the steamer for the scow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What public, were they new to-day, would ever stop to read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Iliad, the Shanàmeh, or the Nibelungenlied?</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Their</i> public’s gone, the artist Greek, the lettered Shah, the hairy Graf⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folio and plesiosaur sleep well; <i>we</i> weary o’er a paragraph;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind moves planet-like no more, it fizzes, cracks, and bustles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From end to end with journals dry the land o’ershadowed rustles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with dead leaves a winter-beech, and, with their breath-roused jars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amused, we care not if they hide the eternal skies and stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the general level of the Board of Brokers sinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Age takes in the newspapers, or, to say sooth unshrinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The newspapers take in the Age, and stocks do all the thinking.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="international-copyright" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">International Copyright</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In vain we call old notions fudge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bend our conscience to our dealing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ten Commandments will not budge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stealing will continue stealing.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="al-fresco" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Al Fresco</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The dandelions and buttercups</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gild all the lawn; the drowsy bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stumbles among the clover-tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summer sweetens all but me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, unfruitful lore of books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whose vain idiom we reject</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul’s more native dialect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aliens among the birds and brooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull to interpret or conceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What gospels lost the woods retrieve!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, ye critics, city-bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who springes set of thus and so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the first man’s footsteps tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those who toil through drifted snow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, my poets, whose sweet spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can make a garden of a cell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I need ye not, for I to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will make one long sweet verse of play.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Snap, chord of manhood’s tenser strain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day I will be a boy again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind’s pursuing element,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a bow slackened and unbent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some dark corner shall be leant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The robin sings, as of old, from the limb!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cat-bird croons in the lilac-bush!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dim arbor, himself more dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silently hops the hermit-thrush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The withered leaves keep dumb for him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The irreverent buccaneering bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath stormed and rifled the nunnery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the lily, and scattered the sacred floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With haste-dropt gold from shrine to door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rich, milk-tingeing buttercup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its tiny polished urn holds up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with ripe summer to the edge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun in his own wine to pledge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our tall elm, this hundredth year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doge of our leafy Venice here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, with an annual ring, doth wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue Adriatic overhead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadows with his palatial mass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep canals of flowing grass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O unestrangèd birds and bees!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O face of Nature always true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O never-unsympathizing trees!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O never-rejecting roof of blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose rash disherison never falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On us unthinking prodigals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet who convictest all our ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So grand and unappeasable!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Methinks my heart from each of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plucks part of childhood back again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long there imprisoned, as the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth every hidden odor seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wood and water, hill and plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more am I admitted peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the upper house of Nature here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel through all my pulses run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The royal blood of wind and sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Upon these elm-arched solitudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hum of neighbor toil intrudes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only hammer that I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wielded by the woodpecker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The single noisy calling his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all our leaf-hid Sybaris;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good old time, close-hidden here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persists, a loyal cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Roundheads prim, with point of fox,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Probe wainscot-chink and empty box;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here no hoarse-voiced iconoclast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insults thy statues, royal Past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself too prone the axe to wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I touch the silver side of the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lance reversed, and challenge peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A willing convert of the trees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How chanced it that so long I tost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cable’s length from this rich coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With foolish anchors hugging close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beckoning weeds and lazy ooze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor had the wit to wreck before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this enchanted island’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither the current of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wiser drift, persuaded me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Oh, might we but of such rare days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build up the spirit’s dwelling-place!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A temple of so Parian stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would brook a marble god alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The statue of a perfect life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far-shrined from earth’s bestaining strife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! though such felicity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our vext world here may not be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, as sometimes the peasant’s hut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shows stones which old religion cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With text inspired, or mystic sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Eternal and Divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn from the consecration deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some fallen nunnery’s mossy sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, from the ruins of this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crumbling in golden dust away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul one gracious block may draw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved with, some fragment of the law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, set in life’s prosaic wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old benedictions may recall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lure some nunlike thoughts to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dwelling here for memory’s sake.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="how-i-consulted-the-oracle-of-the-goldfishes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">How I Consulted the Oracle of the Goldfishes</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What know we of the world immense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the narrow ring of sense?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What should we know, who lounge about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house we dwell in, nor find out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Masked by a wall, the secret cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the soul’s priests in hiding dwell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winding stair that steals aloof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To chapel-mysteries ’neath the roof?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It lies about us, yet as far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sense sequestered as a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New launched its wake of fire to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In secrecies of unprobed space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose beacon’s lightning-pinioned spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might earthward haste a thousand years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor reach it. So remote seems this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>World undiscovered, yet it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A neighbor near and dumb as death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So near, we seem to feel the breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of its hushed habitants as they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass us unchallenged, night and day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never could mortal ear nor eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sound or sign suspect them nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet why may not some subtler sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than those poor two give evidence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfuse the ferment of their being</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into our own, past hearing, seeing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men, if once attempered so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off each other’s thought can know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As horses with an instant thrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Measure their rider’s strength of will?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes not to all some glimpse that brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange sense of sense-escaping things?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wraiths some transfigured nerve divines?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approaches, premonitions, signs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voices of Ariel that die out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dim No Man’s Land of Doubt?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Are these Night’s dusky birds? Are these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phantasmas of the silences</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outer or inner?⁠—rude heirlooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From grovellers in the cavern-glooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in unhuman Nature saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misshapen foes with tusk and claw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with those night-fears brute and blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peopled the chaos of their mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, in ungovernable hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still make their bestial lair in ours?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Were they, or were they not? Yes; no;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncalled they come, unbid they go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave us fumbling in a doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether within us or without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spell of this illusion be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That witches us to hear and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in a twi-life what it will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hath such wonder-working skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That what we deemed most solid-wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns a mere figment of our thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which when we grasp at in despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our fingers find vain semblance there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Psyche seeks a corner-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmer than aught to matter known.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it illusion? Dream-stuff? Show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made of the wish to have it so?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere something, even though this were all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the poor prisoner, on his wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long gazing, from the chance designs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of crack, mould, weather-stain, refines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New and new pictures without cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Landscape, or saint, or altar-piece:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these are Fancy’s common brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hatched in the nest of solitude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Dame Wish’s hourly trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By our rude sires a goddess made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could longing, though its heart broke, give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trances in which we chiefly live?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moments that darken all beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tearfully radiant as a bride?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckonings of bright escape, of wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Purchased with loss of baser things?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blithe truancies from all control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hylë, outings of the soul?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The worm, by trustful instinct led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws from its womb a slender thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drops, confiding that the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will waft it to unpastured trees:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the brain spins itself, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swings boldly off in hope to blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across some tree of knowledge, fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fruitage new, none else shall share:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sated with wavering in the Void,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It backward climbs, so best employed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, where no proof is nor can be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeks refuge with Analogy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth’s soft half-sister, she may tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lurks, seld-sought, the other’s well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With metaphysic midges sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Thought seeks comfort at her door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, at her feet a suppliant cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evokes a spectre of the past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not such as shook the knees of Saul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But winsome, golden-gay withal⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two fishes in a globe of glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pass, and waver, and re-pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lighten that way, and then this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent as meditation is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a half-humorous smile I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this their aimless industry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These errands nowhere and returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grave as a pair of funeral urns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ever-seek and never-find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mocking image of my mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not for this I bade you climb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the darkening deeps of time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help me to tame these wild day-mares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sudden on me unawares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fish, do your duty, as did they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Black Island far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In life’s safe places⁠—far as you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all that now I see or do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You come, embodied flames, as when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew you first, nor yet knew men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your gold renews my golden days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your splendor all my loss repays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis more than sixty years ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since first I watched your to-and-fro;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two generations come and gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From silence to oblivion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their noisy strife and stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lulled in the grave’s forgivingness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While you unquenchably survive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immortal, almost more alive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watched you then a curious boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in your beauty found full joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, by no problem-debts distrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sate at life’s board a welcome guest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You were my sister’s pets, not mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Property’s dividing line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hint of dispossession drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On any map my simplesse knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O golden age, not yet dethroned!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What made me happy, that I owned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You were my wonders, you my Lars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkling days my sun and stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over you entranced I hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too young to know that I was young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing with still unsated bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fancies took some shape like this:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I have my world, and so have you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tiny universe for two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bubble by the artist blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarcely more fragile than our own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where you have all a whale could wish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy as Eden’s primal fish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Manna is dropt you thrice a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some kind heaven not far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still you snatch its softening crumbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, more than we, think whence it comes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No toil seems yours but to explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your cloistered realm from shore to shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes you trace its limits round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes its limpid depths you sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hover motionless midway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like gold-red clouds at set of day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erelong you whirl with sudden whim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Off to your globe’s most distant rim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, greatened by the watery lens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Methinks no dragon of the fens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed huger scales against the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roused by Sir Bevis or Sir Guy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the one eye that meets my view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lidless and strangely largening, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like that of conscience in the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems to make me its single mark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What a benignant lot is yours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have an own All-out-of-doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No words to spell, no sums to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Nepos and no parlyvoo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How happy you without a thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such cross things as Must and Ought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too the happiest of boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see and share your golden joys!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So thought the child, in simpler words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of you his finny flocks and herds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, an old man, I bid you rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fine sight behind the eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, lo, you float and flash again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark cistern of my brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But o’er your visioned flames I brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other mien, in other mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are no longer there to please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to stir argument, and tease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My thought with all the ghostly shapes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which no moody man escapes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diminished creature, I no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find Fairyland beside my door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for each moment’s pleasure pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the <i>quart d’heure</i> of Rabelais!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I watch you in your crystal sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonder if you see and hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those shapes and sounds that stir the wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjecture of the world outside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your pent lives, as we in ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have you surmises dim of powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of presences obscurely shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lives a riddle to your own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just on the senses’ outer verge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sense-nerves into soul-nerves merge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where we conspire our own deceit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confederate in deft Fancy’s feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fooled brain befools the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pageants woven of its own lies?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But <i>are</i> they lies? Why more than those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phantoms that startle your repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half seen, half heard, then flit away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave you your prose-bounded day?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The things ye see as shadows I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know to be substance; tell me why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My visions, like those haunting you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not be as substantial too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas, who ever answer heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From fish, and dream-fish too? Absurd!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your consciousness I half divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you are wholly deaf to mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, I dismiss you; ye have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that ye could; our silk is spun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dive back into the deep of dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where what is real is what, seems!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I shall fancy till my grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your lives to mine a lesson gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If lesson none, an image, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impeaching self-conceit in men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who put their confidence alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In what they call the Seen and Known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How seen? How known? As through your glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our wavering apparitions pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perplexingly, then subtly wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some quite other thing by thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here shall my resolution be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of the mystery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is haply wholesomer for eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cheat us to be overwise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am happy in my right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love God’s darkness as His light.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="turners-old-temeraire" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Turner’s Old Téméraire</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Under a Figure Symbolizing the Church</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Thou wast the fairest of all man-made things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breath of heaven bore up thy cloudy wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, patient in their triple rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunders crouched about thy flank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their black lips silent with the doom of kings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The storm-wind loved to rock him in thy pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swell thy vans with breath of great designs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long-wildered pilgrims of the main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thee relaid their course again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose prow was guided by celestial signs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How didst thou trample on tumultuous seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, like some basking sea-beast stretched at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the bull-fronted surges glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caressingly along thy side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like glad hounds leaping by the huntsman’s knees!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Heroic feet, with fire of genius shod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle’s ecstasy thy deck have trod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from their touch a fulgor ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through plank and spar, from man to man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welding thee to a thunderbolt of God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now a black demon, belching fire and steam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drags thee away, a pale, dismantled dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all thy desecrated bulk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must landlocked lie, a helpless hulk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather weeds in the regardless stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Woe’s me, from Ocean’s sky-horizoned air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this! Better, the flame-cross still aflare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot-shattered to have met thy doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thy last lightnings cheered the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than here be safe in dangerless despair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy drooping symbol to the flag-staff clings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy rudder soothes the tide to lazy rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy thunders now but birthdays greet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy planks forget the martyrs’ feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy masts what challenges the sea-wind brings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou a mere hospital, where human wrecks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like winter-flies, crawl, those renowned decks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er trodden save by captive foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonted sternly to impose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God’s will and thine on bowed imperial necks!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall nevermore, engendered of thy fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new sea-eagle heir thy conqueror name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with commissioned talons wrench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy supplanter’s grimy clench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sheath of steel, his wings of smoke and flame?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This shall the pleased eyes of our children see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this the stars of God long even as we;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth listens for his wings; the Fates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expectant lean; Faith cross-propt waits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tired waves of Thought’s insurgent sea.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="st-michael-the-weigher" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">St. Michael the Weigher</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Stood the tall Archangel weighing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All man’s dreaming, doing, saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the failure and the pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the triumph and the gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the unimagined years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of hopes, more full of tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since old Adam’s hopeless eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward searched for Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, instead, the flame-blade saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of inexorable Law.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Waking, I beheld him there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his fire-gold, flickering hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his blinding armor stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the scales were in his hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty were they, and full well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could poise both heaven and hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Angel,’ asked I humbly then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Weighest thou the souls of men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thine office is, I know.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Nay,’ he answered me, ‘not so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I weigh the hope of Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the power of choice began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the world, of good or ill.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I waited and was still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In one scale I saw him place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the glories of our race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cups that lit Belsbazzar’s feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gems, the lightning of the East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kublai’s sceptre, Cæsar’s sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a poet’s golden word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a skill of science, vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make men as gods again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the other scale he threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things regardless, outcast, few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Martyr-ash, arena sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of St. Francis’ cord a strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beechen cups of men whose need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fasted that the poor might feed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disillusions and despairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of young saints with, grief-grayed hairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken hearts that brake for Man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Marvel through my pulses ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing then the beam divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly on this hand decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Earth’s splendor and renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted light as thistle-down.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-valentine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Valentine</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Let others wonder what fair face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their path shall shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, fancying half, half hoping, trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some maiden shape of tenderest grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">To be their Valentine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let other hearts with tremor sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One secret wish enshrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Fate may lead their happy feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Julia in the lane to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">To be their Valentine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I, far happier, am secure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know the eyes benign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The face more beautiful and pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than fancy’s fairest portraiture</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">That mark my Valentine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>More than when first I singled, thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This only prayer is mine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, in the years I yet shall see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, darling, in the past, thou’ll be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">My happy Valentine.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-april-birthday-at-sea" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An April Birthday⁠—At Sea</h2>
			<p>
				<span>On this wild waste, where never blossom came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save the white wind-flower to the billow’s cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or those pale disks of momentary flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loose petals dropped from Dian’s careless lap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What far fetched influence all my fancy fills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With singing birds and dancing daffodils?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why, ’tis her day whom jocund April brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who brings April with her in her eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is her vision lights my lonely thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even as a rose that opes its hushed surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In sick men’s chambers, with its glowing breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Plants Summer at the glacier edge of Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gray sky, sea gray as mossy stones on graves;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anon comes April in her jollity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dancing down the bleak vales ’tween the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes them green glades for all her flowers and me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The gulls turn thrushes, charmed are sea and sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By magic of my thought, and know not why.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, but I know, for never April’s shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor passion gust of rain, nor all her flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered in haste, were seen so sudden fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As she in various mood, on whom the powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of happiest stars in fair conjunction smiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To bless the birth, of April’s darling child.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="love-and-thought" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love and Thought</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What hath Love with Thought to do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still at variance are the two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is sudden, Love is rash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is like the levin flash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes as swift, as swiftly goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his mark as surely knows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thought is lumpish, Thought is slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighing long ’tween yes and no;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When dear Love is dead and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought comes creeping in anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in his deserted nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits to hold the crowner’s quest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since we love, what need to think?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happiness stands on a brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence too easy ’tis to fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither’s no return at all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have a care, half-hearted lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought would only push her over!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-nobler-lover" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Nobler Lover</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If he be a nobler lover, take him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You in you I seek, and not myself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love with men’s what women choose to make him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seraph strong to soar, or fawn-eyed elf:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All I am or can, your beauty gave it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifting me a moment nigh to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my bit of heaven, I fain would save it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine I thought it was, I never knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What you take of me is yours to serve you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All I give, you gave to me before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him win you! If I but deserve you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I keep all you grant to him and more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You shall make me dare what others dare not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You shall keep my nature pure as snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a light from you that others share not</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall transfigure me where’er I go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let me be your thrall! However lowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be the bondsman’s service I can do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loyalty shall make it high and holy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naught can be unworthy, done for you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men shall say, ‘A lover of this fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such an icy mistress well beseems.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Women say, ‘Could we deserve such passion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We might be the marvel that he dreams.’</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-hearing-a-sonata-of-beethovens-played-in-the-next-room" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Hearing a Sonata of Beethoven’s Played in the Next Room</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Unseen Musician, thou art sure to please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For those same notes in happier days I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured by dear hands that long have never stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet now again for me delight the keys:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah me, to strong illusions such as these</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What are Life’s solid things? The walls that gird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our senses, lo, a casual scent or word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Levels, and it is the soul that hears and sees!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play on, dear girl, and many be the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere some grayhaired survivor sit like me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for thy largess pay a meed of tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto another who, beyond the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Time and Change, perhaps not sadly hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A music in this verse undreamed by thee!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="verses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Verses</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Intended to Go with a Posset Dish to My Dear Little Goddaughter, 1882</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>In good old times, which means, you know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time men wasted long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we must blame our brains or mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that we squander seems less good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those blest days when wish was act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fancy dreamed itself to fact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godfathers used to fill with guineas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cups they gave their pickaninnies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performing functions at the chrism</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not mentioned in the Catechism.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No millioner, poor I fill up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wishes my more modest cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though had I Amalthea’s horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It should be hers the newly born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, shudder not! I should bestow it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So brimming full she couldn’t blow it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wishes aren’t horses: true, but still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are worse roadsters than goodwill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so I wish my darling health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just to round my couplet, wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With faith enough to bridge the chasm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt Genesis and Protoplasm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear her o’er life’s current vext</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this world to a better next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the full glow of God puts out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor reason’s farthing candle, Doubt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve wished her healthy, wealthy, wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What more can godfather devise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since there’s room for countless wishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these old-fashioned posset dishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll wish her from my plenteous store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those commodities two more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her father’s wit, veined through and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tenderness that Watts (but whew!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Celia’s aflame, I mean no stricture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his Sir Josh-surpassing picture)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish her next, and ’tis the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all I’ve dropt into the bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mother’s beauty⁠—nay, but two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fair at once would never do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let her but the half possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troy was besieged ten years for less.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now if there’s any truth in Darwin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we from what was, all we are win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I simply wish the child to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sample of Heredity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoying to the full extent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life’s best, the Unearned Increment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Fate her Godfather to flout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave <i>him</i> in legacies of gout.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, then, the cup is duly filled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walk steady, dear, lest all be spilled.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-a-bust-of-general-grant" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On a Bust of General Grant</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Strong, simple, silent are the [steadfast] laws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sway this universe, of none withstood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unconscious of man’s outcries or applause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what man deems his evil or his good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Fates ally them with a cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wallows in the sea-trough and seems lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drifting in danger of the reefs and sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shallow counsels, this way, that way, tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strength, silence, simpleness, of these three strands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They twist the cable shall the world hold fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where its anchors clutch the bed-rock of the Past.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strong, simple, silent, therefore such was he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who helped us in our need; the eternal law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That who can saddle Opportunity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is God’s elect, though many a mortal flaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May minish him in eyes that closely see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was verified in him: what need we say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one who made success where others failed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, with no light save that of common day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck hard, and still struck on till Fortune quailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that (so sift the Norns) a desperate van</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er fell at last to one who was not wholly man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A face all prose where Time’s [benignant] haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Softens no raw edge yet, nor makes all fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the beguiling light of vanished days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is relentless granite, bleak and bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roughhewn, and scornful of æsthetic phrase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing is here for fancy, naught for dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Present’s hard uncompromising light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accents all vulgar outlines, flaws, and seams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet vindicates some pristine natural right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertopping that hereditary grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which marks the gain or loss of some time-fondled race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Marius looked, methinks, and Cromwell so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in the purple born, to those they led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer for that and costlier to the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New moulders of old forms, by nature bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The exhaustless life of manhood’s seeds to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let but the ploughshare of portentous times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike deep enough to reach them where they lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despair and danger are their fostering climes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their best sun bursts from a stormy sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was our man of men, nor would abate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The utmost due manhood could claim of fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nothing Ideal, a plain-people’s man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the first glance, a more deliberate ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds type primeval, theirs in whose veins ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such blood as quelled the dragon In his den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made harmless fields, and better worlds began:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came grim-silent, saw and did the deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was to do; in his master-grip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our sword flashed joy; no skill of words could breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such sure conviction as that close-clamped lip;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew our dragon, nor, so seemed it, knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had done more than any simplest man might do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet did this man, war-tempered, stern as steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where steel opposed, prove soft in civil sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand hilt-hardened had lost tact to feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world’s base coin, and glozing knaves made prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him and of the entrusted Commonweal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Truth insists and will not be denied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We turn our eyes away, and so will Fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if in his last battle he had died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victor for us and spotless of all blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doer of hopeless tasks which praters shirk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of those still plain men that do the world’s rough work.</span>
			</p>
			<p>[Footnote 1: The wise Scandinavians probably called their bards by the queer-looking title of Scald in a delicate way, as it were, just to hint to the world the hot water they always get into.]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 2: To demonstrate quickly and easily how per- -versely absurd ’tis to sound this name <i>Cowper</i>, As people in general call him named <i>super</i>, I remark that he rhymes it himself with horse-trooper.]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 3: (If you call Snooks an owl, he will show by his looks That he’s morally certain you’re jealous of Snooks.)]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 4:(Cuts rightly called wooden, as all must admit.)]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 5: That is in most cases we do, but not all, Past a doubt, there are men who are innately small, Such as Blank, who, without being ‘minished a tittle, Might stand for a type of the Absolute Little.]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 6: (And at this just conclusion will surely arrive, That the goodness of earth is more dead than alive.)]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 7: Not forgetting their tea and their toast, though, the while.]</p>
			<p>[Footnote 8: Turn back now to page⁠—goodness only knows what, And take a fresh hold on the thread of my plot.]</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
